--- Page 1 ---
Biology is life with Tr. Kugonza
S.1 BIOLOGY TEACHING NOTES 
By Kugonza H Arthur (2017)
[Note: This page contains 1 diagram(s)/image(s)]

--- Page 2 ---
Page 1 of 51 @Kugonza Arthur H 0701 366474 
Biology is a word derived from two Greek words i.e. “Bios” and “logos” where Bios means life and logos means 
knowledge. 
 
Therefore Biology is the study of life or living things. All living things are called organisms. 
 
Branches of biology 
1. Botany, the study of plants. 
2. Zoology, the study of animals. 
3. Anatomy, the study of the structure of living 
things. 
4. Nutrition, the study of food and how living things 
feed. 
5. Ecology, the study of how organisms are related 
to their environment / surrounding. 
6. Mycology, the study of fungi. 
7. Virology, the study of virus. 
8. Bacteriology, the study of bacteria. 
9. Entomology, the study of insects. 
10. Microbiology, the study of microorganisms. 
11. Physiology, the study of process and functioning 
of the body parts. 
12. Genetics, the study of inheritance. 
13. Taxonomy, the study of classification of 
organisms 
14. Ornithology, the study of birds. 
15. Ichthyology, the study of fish. 
 
Why do we study biology? 
 To get knowledge on how to treat the sick 
 To get knowledge needed to become doctors, 
and nurses 
 To get knowledge on how to manufacture drugs 
 To get knowledge on how to conserve the 
environment 
 To know how our body functions. 
Characteristics of living things 
1. Nutrition/feeding 
It’s a process by which living things obtain. 
Green plants make their own food while the rest obtain already made food from the environment. 
2. Respiration 
This is the breakdown of food to release energy in the body. 
3. Excretion 
Is the process by which waste products are removed from the body e.g. urea in urine, carbon dioxide, etc. 
4. Reproduction 
This is the ability of an organism to give rise to new organisms/off springs. 
5. Movement 
This is the ability of an organism to transfer its body from one place to another. They move in search for food, water, 
shelter, mates, and run away from predators. 
6. Growth  
Growth is a permanent increase in size of an organism. It is followed by development.  
7. Irritability / sensitivity 
It is the ability of an organism to respond to changes in its environment  
 
Differences between plants and animals 
Plants 
Animals 
i) 
Have cell wall. 
Lack cell wall. 
ii) Have chlorophyll. 
Lack chlorophyll. 
iii) Movement is by growth of plant parts. 
Movement involves the whole organism. 
iv) They make their own food by photosynthesis. 
Feed on already made food. 
v) Respond to stimulus slowly since it involves growth. 
Quick / immediate response to stimulus. 
 
TOOLS USED TO STUDY BIOLOGY 
1. 
Hand lens:  
 
 
A normal hand lens is a convex lens mounted in a frame. It is placed a shorter distance 
of about 5cm from the eye and the object.
[Note: This page contains 2 diagram(s)/image(s)]

--- Page 3 ---
Page 3 of 51 @Kugonza Arthur H 0701 366474  
Determination of magnification using a hand lens 
Magnification refers to how much larger the object appears compared to its real size. 
Magnification = 
𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒 𝑜𝑓 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒/𝑑𝑟𝑎𝑤𝑖𝑛𝑔
𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒 𝑜𝑓 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑜𝑏𝑗𝑒𝑐𝑡
 
 
Example  
Calculate the magnification of an object, which is 10cm tall whose image appears to be 20cm tall. 
Solution  
Using the formula 
Magnification  
𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒 𝑜𝑓 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒/𝑑𝑟𝑎𝑤𝑖𝑛𝑔
𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒 𝑜𝑓 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑜𝑏𝑗𝑒𝑐𝑡
 
 
 
= 
20 𝑐𝑚
10 𝑐𝑚 
 
   2 
 
2. 
Microscopes 
It is an instrument used to view objects that are too small to be seen by an unaided eye. 
  
Types of microscopes 
 
The electron microscope which uses a beam of electrons. 
 
The compound light microscope. 
 
THE COMPOUND LIGHT MICROSCOPE 
It is called so because it uses a beam of light to view objects and has more than one convex lens. It is used in 
hospitals, schools and some industries. 
Structure of a compound light microscope 
 
FUNCTIONS OF THE DIFFERENT PARTS 
1. Eye Piece:  
 
It is where the eye is placed while viewing the 
specimen 
 
Enables one to view the specimen  
 
It magnifies the image from the objective lens. 
2. Barrel: 
 
Provides support for the eye piece and objective 
lens. 
3. Nose piece/ turret/:  
 
It holds the objective lenses in position 
 
Can be rotated to position a particular lens 
required for a particular magnification. 
4. Stage:  
 
It is where a prepared slide is placed for 
observation. 
5. Mirror:  
 
It reflects light from external source through the 
specimen.
[Note: This page contains 1 diagram(s)/image(s)]

--- Page 4 ---
Page 4 of 51 @Kugonza Arthur H 0701 366474  
6. Stand / Base:  
 
Supports instrument in on a flat surface. 
7. Diaphragm:  
 
Regulates the amount of light passing through 
the specimen. 
8. Condenser:  
 
Concentrates the light reflected by the mirror 
through the object / specimen on the stage. 
9. Arm:  
 
Used for carrying the instrument. 
10. Clip: 
 
Keeps the slide firmly on the stage. 
11. Coarse adjustment knob:  
 
Used for focusing of the object under study.  
12. Fine adjustment knob:  
 
Brings specimen into a sharp clearer focus 
(final focusing). 
13. Objective lens: 
 
Magnifies the specimen under study. They are 
normally two or three. Low power (shortest), 
medium power and high power (longest). 
 
Care of a microscope 
The microscope is very delicate, expensive instrument which is very useful in the study of biology. Thus it should be 
handled carefully doing the following; 
 It should be carried with both hands. 
 Should never be dropped. 
 Always kept in an upright position 
 Only wipe the lens with soft lens tissue. 
 It should always be kept in its special designed box. 
 
Determination of magnification of a microscope 
Magnification refers to how much larger the object appears compared to its real size. 
Magnification = magnification of the eye piece lens X magnification of the objective lens. 
 
Example: 
If the eye piece is marked x10 and the magnification of the objective lens is x40, what is the total magnification of a 
microscope? 
Magnification = magnification of the eye piece lens x magnification of the objective lens. 
                       =10 x 40=400 
The specimen was magnified x400 
Complete the table below 
Eye piece lens 
Objective lens 
Magnification  
X15 
X7 
 
X60 
 
X240 
 
X17 
X340 
X25 
X8 
 
 
THE CELL 
The cell is the smallest basic unit of life. Unicellular organisms are only made up of a single cell e.g. amoeba, 
paramecium. Multicellular organisms are made up of many cells e.g. man, cows, bean plant, etc. 
The origin of new cells 
New cells are formed from already existing cells by a process called cell division. The already existing cell is called a 
parent/ mother cell; and the new cells formed are called daughter cells. 
Animal cell 
 
                     Plant cell
[Note: This page contains 2 diagram(s)/image(s)]

--- Page 5 ---
Page 5 of 51 @Kugonza Arthur H 0701 366474  
Cell parts and their functions 
Cell part  
Description  
Function  
1. Cell 
Membrane 
Is the outer living part of a cell and it is 
found in all cells.  
Its semi permeable i.e. has tiny holes 
through which only very small molecules 
like water can pass through. 
 It allows movement of materials in and out of 
the cell. 
 It regulates the shape and strength of a cell. 
 Offers protection to the inner parts of the cell. 
 Binds protoplasm/ cytoplasm 
2. Cell Walls 
 
It is found in plant cells and it is made up 
of cellulose (a nonliving substance) which 
gives it its rigid tough nature. 
 
 It gives the plant cell its shape. 
 Protects the inner parts of the cell. 
 Allows movement of materials in and out of the 
cell. 
 It offers mechanical strength to the cell.  
3. Nucleus 
 
It is surrounded by double membrane 
called the nuclear membrane. 
 
 Controls cell activities. 
 Controls cell division  
 Stores the genetic material of a cell 
 Plays an active role in protein synthesis. 
4. Cell Vacuole 
 
Contains a watery substance called cell 
sap and is surrounded by a single 
membrane called the tonoplast.  
Each Plant cell possesses one large 
permanent central vacuole while each 
animal cell has many temporary vacuoles. 
 Stores waste materials before they are 
expelled. 
 It is a temporary food store. 
 Gives shape to the cell.  
 
5. Cytoplasm 
 
It is a fluid material that contains cell 
organelles e.g. mitochondria, nucleus etc. 
 
 Site for cell activities i.e. metabolic reactions. 
 Site for storage of energy producing materials 
e.g. starch and glycogen. 
6. Mitochondria 
 
This is the cell ‘power house’. It is found in 
both plant and animal cells. 
 It manufactures and releases energy through 
respiration. 
7. Chloroplast 
 
Found in only plant cells only. 
 
 Contains a green pigment called chlorophyll 
that traps sunlight for photosynthesis. 
 
Comparing a plant and animal cell 
Similarities 
 Both have a nucleus. 
 Both have mitochondria. 
 Both have a vacuole. 
 Both have a cytoplasm. 
 Both have a cell membrane. 
Differences: 
Plant cell 
Animal cell 
i) 
Regular in shape 
Irregular in shape 
ii) Has a cellulose cell wall. 
Lacks a cellulose call wall. 
iii) Has chloroplast. 
Lacks chloroplast. 
iv) Large vacuole centrally located. 
Cell vacuole very small and positioned at the side. 
v) Has a middle lamella. 
Lacks a middle lamella. 
vi) Nucleus is positioned at one side. 
Nucleus centrally located. 
vii) Store food as starch granules. 
Store food as glycogen granules. 
viii) Has a tonoplast around the vacuole 
Has no tonoplast 
ix) Has a Thin layer of cytoplasm 
Has a thick layer of cytoplasm 
x) Has a permanent vacuole  
Has a temporary vacuole

--- Page 6 ---
S.1 BIOLOGY TEACHING NOTES 
Page 6 of 51 @Kugonza Arthur H 0701 366474 
SPECIALISED CELLS 
These are cells modified to perform a particular function. 
Specialized cell (animals) 
Drawing  
Function  
Red blood cells  
These transport oxygen in our bodies. 
Sperm cells 
These fuses with the ovum to form a zygote 
during fertilization 
 
Ovum or egg 
This is the female reproductive cell that fuses 
with a sperm to form a zygote. 
White blood cells 
This defends the body against infections and 
diseases 
Platelets: 
These are bring about blood clotting (stop 
bleeding) 
 
 
 
 
Specialized cell (plants) 
Drawing  
Function  
Root hair cells 
 
They are found in plant roots 
They absorb water and mineral salts from the 
soil 
 
Palisade cells  
 
 
These are found in leaves of green plants. 
They carry out the process of photosynthesis 
 
Guard cells  
 
They are found in green leaves 
They control the opening and closing of 
stomata in leaves 
Parenchyma cells 
 
Support in herbaceous plants 
Storage of starch.
[Note: This page contains 10 diagram(s)/image(s)]

--- Page 7 ---
S.1 BIOLOGY TEACHING NOTES 
Page 7 of 51 @Kugonza Arthur H 0701 366474 
LEVELS OF ORGANISATION  
Cell ⟶ tissue ⟶ organ ⟶ organ system⟶organism 
 
Level 
of 
organization 
Definition  
Examples and functions  
1. Cell  
Smallest basic unit of life 
Red blood cell, root hair cell 
 
2. Tissue 
 
A tissue is a group of similar 
cells linked together to perform 
a particular function.  
A tissue may be made up of 
single type of cell or may 
comprise of different types of 
cells. 
i) 
Blood tissue made up of red blood cells, white blood cells and 
platelets. Blood transports materials in the body and offers 
protection. 
ii) Nervous tissue made up of nerve cells. It transmits impulses in the 
body. 
iii) Muscular tissue made up of muscle cells which cause movement of 
body parts 
iv) Photosynthetic tissue made of palisade cells for photosynthesis. 
3. Organ 
 
An organ is a collection of 
tissues specialized in carrying 
out a specific function. An 
organ is made up of different 
types of cells grouped together 
as a unit 
i) 
Eye for sight  
ii) Heart for pumping blood 
iii) Ear for hearing 
iv) Kidney for purifying blood 
v) Leaves for photosynthesis 
vi) Roots for absorbing water and mineral salts 
4. Organ 
system 
 
An organ system is a collection 
of different organs performing a 
specific function(s) 
i) 
Nervous system (Brain, Spinal cord),  
ii) Circulatory system (Heart, Lungs and Blood vessels),  
iii) Digestive system (gullet, stomach, small intestines). 
iv) Shoot system (leaves stems. flowers) 
v) Root system (roots) 
5. Organism 
 
This is a collection of organ 
systems 
working 
together 
efficiently as a unit. 
man, cow, banana plant

--- Page 8 ---
S.1 BIOLOGY TEACHING NOTES 
Page 8 of 51 @Kugonza Arthur H 0701 366474 
CLASSIFICATION OF LIVING ORGANISMS 
Classification is the process of placing animals and plants into groups according to their similarities in structure, 
physiological processes and behavioral. 
This involves collecting organisms, observing their structural characteristics and sorting them into groups known as taxa.  
The branch of biology concerned with classification is called taxonomy. 
The word taxonomy is derived from a Greek word taxis- meaning arrangement and nomia-meaning distribution. 
 
Level of classification 
The level of classification is called taxon. Plural –taxa. A taxon is a unit of classification made of similar organisms. The 
largest taxon is the kingdom and the smallest taxon is the species. All organisms have been put in seven major taxa and 
these include: 
1. Kingdom 
2. Phylum (phyla) 
3. Class 
4. Order 
5. Family 
6. Genus (genera) 
7. Species 
Easy formula for seven taxa from highest to lowest 
 
 
 
 
Kingdom: 
A kingdom is the largest taxon, and all the other taxa (groups of living organisms) are placed in one the kingdoms. In 
modern classification system, there are 5 kingdoms: 
1. Monera (bacteria)  
2. Protoctista 
3. Fungi (Mycota) 
4. Plantae 
5. Animalia  
Note: 
Viruses are not classified in any of the five kingdoms because they do not have all the characteristics of all living things. 
For example; 
 They do not have cellular structures like cytoplasm, organelles. 
 They use nuclear material and organelles of other living organisms to carry out their metabolic processes. 
 They can survive out their host’s cell as inert organic crystals.  
Species: 
A species is the smallest taxon which is made up of individuals that have almost the same characteristic features and can 
interbreed freely to produce viable off springs i.e. reproductively fertile off springs 
 
Examples of hierarchy system of classification 
 
Human 
Honeybee 
Maize 
Meadow mushroom 
Kingdom  
Animalia  
Animalia  
Plantae  
Fungi  
Phylum 
Chordata  
Arthropoda  
Angiospermophyta  
Basidiomycota 
Class  
Mammalia  
Insect  
Monocotyledoneae  
Basidiomcetes 
Order  
primates 
Hymenoptera  
Commelinales  
Agaricales 
Family  
Hominidae  
Apidae  
Poaceae  
Agaricaceae 
Genus  
Homo  
Apis  
Zea  
Agaricus 
Species  
sapiens 
mellifera 
mays  
campestris  
 
Binomial system of nomenclature: 
Binomial nomenclature is the system of giving a scientific name to an organism. 
The word binomial comes from two words bi- meaning two and nomio meaning name. 
The first accepted classification and nomenclature was introduced by a Swedish scientist called Carl Linnaeus (1707 - 
1778). 
 
 
Kids 
K 
(Kingdom) 
Play 
P 
(Phylum) 
Cards 
C 
(Class) 
On 
O 
(Order) 
Fairly 
F 
(Family) 
Good 
G 
(Genus) 
Sides 
S 
(Species)
[Note: This page contains 1 diagram(s)/image(s)]

--- Page 9 ---
S.1 BIOLOGY TEACHING NOTES 
Page 9 of 51 @Kugonza Arthur H 0701 366474 
Rules of binomial system of nomenclature 
 Each organism should be given two Latin or Greek names which include generic (genus) name followed by specific 
(species) name. 
 The generic name should start with a capital letter and a specific name starts with the small letter 
 When written both names should be underlined  separately or printed in italics 
 
Examples of some scientific name for common organisms 
Human – scientific name is Homo sapiens (Homo sapiens – when hand written) 
Maize – scientific name is Zea mays 
Assignment: write the scientific names of the following; honey bee, meadow mushroom and house fly. 
 
Importance of classification 
 It is easy to study organism in a group since the members of a specific group resemble. 
 It helps new organisms to be easily classified since they share certain characteristics with those in existence. 
 It helps the scientist to easily identify organisms belonging to the same group. 
 The use of scientific names enables to prevent confusion that would arise if the organism had different names used in 
different places. 
 
KINGDOM: MONERA 
This basically comprises of bacteria which are prokaryotes 
General characteristics 
 They are unicellular with cells occurring either alone or 
in colonies. 
 The cells lack membrane bound organelles. 
 Some are parasitic and others are saprophytic 
 They reproduce asexually by means of spores or binary 
fission. 
 
General structure of bacterium 
 
 
Bacteria are grouped according to their shapes. There are four groups of bacteria  
Shape 
Type 
Structure  
Coccus 
Diplococcus: These occur as a pair of spherical cells. 
 
Single 
spherical cells 
 
Staphylococcus: 
Spherical shaped occurring in a bunch or group 
 
Streptococcus: Spherical cells in a chain 
 
Bacilli: 
These are rod 
shaped. 
Bacillus: Single rod shaped bacterium. 
 
Diplobacilli: A pair of rod shaped bacteria. 
 
Streptobacilli: Rod shaped bacteria existing in a chain. 
 
Spherical spore bacilli: These have spherical spore at the 
head e.g. clostridium tetani which causes tetanus 
 
 
Vibrio: 
Coma shaped 
Vibrio cholera which causes cholera 
 
Spirillus 
These are spiral shaped bacteria 
 
 
Economic importance of bacteria 
i) 
Bacteria causes decay of dead plants and animals thus releasing nutrients for use by green plants 
ii) Rhizobium converts the nitrogen into nitrates in the soils 
iii) Bacteria manufacture vitamin B12 and k
[Note: This page contains 1 diagram(s)/image(s)]

--- Page 10 ---
S.1 BIOLOGY TEACHING NOTES 
Page 10 of 51 @Kugonza Arthur H 0701 366474 
iv) Used in curing tea and tobacco, making silage /retting flax. Curing is process of treating and preserving tea / tobacco 
v) Bacteria destroys harmful organisms in sewage in the sewage treatment 
vi) Used in industrial processing of food like vinegar, cheese, and yoghurt 
vii) Symbiotic bacteria in ruminants help in digesting cellulose by secreting enzymes cellulose 
viii) Bacteria cause decay and food spoilage  
ix) Denitrifying bacteria converts nitrates in to free nitrogen in the soil. 
x) Some bacteria cause harmful diseases to man like anthrax. 
 
KINGDOM:   PROTOCTISTA 
Kingdom Protoctista is made up of single celled organisms. It includes all protozoans and algae. 
 
PROTOZOANS 
Protozoans are unicellular organisms. I.e. single celled organisms. 
They have a true nucleus with a nuclear membrane. 
Examples of protozoa include Amoeba, Paramecium, Euglena, Trypanosome and plasmodium. 
 
1. AMOEBA 
Amoeba is a free-living protozoa found at the bottom of ponds. It has 
temporary extensions called pseudopodia used for locomotion. The 
pseudopodia are also used for enclosing food particles which form 
food vacuoles. The food in vacuole is digested by phagocytosis. 
The excess amount of water can be regulated and removed by 
contractile vacuole. 
 
Locomotion in amoeba 
Amoeba moves by means of pseudopodia (false 
legs) that are formed by the flow of cytoplasm in the 
direction of movement but this is followed by the flow 
of other protoplasm in the same direction, as shown 
below: 
 
 
Excretion in amoeba 
Excess water is eliminated from its body by contractile vacuole. This collects the water and moves to the cell membrane 
where it discharges its contents. The process is repeated and hence it is the means of osmoregulation (control of water 
amount inside the body) by amoeba. Other by-products diffuse out of the cytoplasm through the cell membrane e.g. CO2. 
 
Feeding in amoeba 
 
 
Amoeba feeds on microscopic algae and bacteria. It captures the food by developing pseudopodia around the food and it 
engulfs it. The cytoplasm flows around the food. This one now forms the food vacuole. 
Digestive enzymes are produced which break the food particles into soluble food substances. The products are utilized 
and amoeba moves away from undigested food remains. This is called egestion. 
 
Reproduction in amoeba 
 
Amoeba reproduces by binary fission. 
 
An amoeba ready to reproduce stops moving and rounds off. 
 
 
The nucleus then constricts and divides into two identical parts. 
 
The cytoplasm begins to constrict so that the separation of the remaining parts into 2 can occur. 
 
Two identical amoebae forms and move apart to feed and grow into mature amoebae before they divide again.
[Note: This page contains 3 diagram(s)/image(s)]

--- Page 11 ---
S.1 BIOLOGY TEACHING NOTES 
Page 11 of 51 @Kugonza Arthur H 0701 366474 
 
2. PARAMECIUM 
Paramecium uses cilia for movement and collection of food. It has special row of cilia that waft food particles into the 
hollow gullet. 
 
3. EUGLENA 
  This is commonly found in water and in soil. It is 
photosynthetic and moves by means of flagellum. 
 
 
ALGAE 
This is a collective name for a varied group of 
phyla. They are normally aquatic or live in damp 
terrestrial 
habitats. 
It 
comprises 
of 
the 
Chlorophyta (green algae) and Phaeophyta 
(brown algae). 
Chlorophyta 
This includes all the green algae. 
 Algae: 
These are green simple plants with body not 
differentiated into root, stem and leaves, e.g. 
chlamydomonus, chlorella and spirogyra. 
Drawing of spirogyra
[Note: This page contains 4 diagram(s)/image(s)]

--- Page 12 ---
S.1 BIOLOGY TEACHING NOTES 
Page 12 of 51 @Kugonza Arthur H 0701 366474 
General characteristics of algae 
 They have a green pigment called 
chlorophyll. 
 They are usually filamentous. 
 They are aquatic (grow in water) 
 They 
reproduce 
asexually 
by 
fragmentation. 
Examples include, spirogyra, and brown 
algae. 
Characteristics of spirogyra 
 It is filamentous. 
 It’s found in fresh water of slow flowing water in ponds, 
streams, and lakes 
 It grows in length and its always one cell thick. 
 Each cell has one spiral chloroplast from one end to another 
 Small protein bodies called pyrenoids are present on each 
ribbon like chloroplast and are used  to store starch 
The nucleus is in the center to control the activities of the cell 
 
Economic importance of algae 
 Algae are used in the manufacture of agar which is used in laboratory experiments. 
 They provide food for humans and fish. 
 When they die, they sink at the bottom of the sea bed on which they can turn into oil. 
 During photosynthesis, they release oxygen that is necessary for the respiration of animals that live in water. 
 They are used in the manufacture ice cream, cosmetics, and plants. 
 They pollute water, i.e. producing foul smell. 
 They clog water pipes hindering the flow of water 
Exercise: 
1. A euglena can be considered an animal or plant. State the characteristics that makes it; 
i) An animal      ii) A plant 
 
KINGDOM:  FUNGI 
Kingdom fungi mostly have multicellular organisms such as mushroom and mould. Some are unicellular like yeast. 
Other examples include toad stool, smuts, penicillium, mucor (grows on soil and dead plants), rhizopus (common bread 
mould). 
Rhizopus is saprophytic fungus which grows on decaying food like bread and fruits. 
 
Drawing of common bread mould (Rhizopus) 
 
Drawing of a mushroom 
 
 
General characteristics 
 Fungi inhabit damp moist places. 
 They reproduce by means of spores.  
 They have saprophytic or parasitic mode of nutrition. 
 Have vegetative body called mycelium which consists of a network of hyphae. 
Economic importance of fungi 
 Fungi decay dead organic materials to release materials needed by green plants  
 Yeast is used in the production of alcohol for brewers and wine makers. 
 Fungi produce antibiotics e.g. penicillin made from penicillium molds 
 Fungi provide food e.g. mushroom also used in making cheese. 
 Fungi can spoil food e.g. Rhizopus and penicillium on the bread, cakes, fruits and jam. 
 Fungi causes plant disease e.g. rust, brown patch, white bright, smut, etc. 
 Fungi causes diseases to man e.g. ringworm, athlete’s foot.
[Note: This page contains 2 diagram(s)/image(s)]

--- Page 13 ---
S.1 BIOLOGY TEACHING NOTES 
Page 13 of 51 @Kugonza Arthur H 0701 366474 
KINGDOM PLANTAE 
This kingdom contains multicellular organisms whose cells contain chlorophyll and are covered by a cellulose cell wall. 
General characteristics 
 They are mostly green in colour thus carry out photosynthesis  
 They are multicellular. 
 Their cells are surrounded by cellulose cell wall. 
The kingdom is divided into two main divisions i.e. Bryophyta and Tracheophyta 
 
DIVISION: BRYOPHYTA 
The division is comprised of liverworts and mosses. 
Main characteristics 
 They have simple leaves 
 They have rhizoids that are root-like structures. They are used mainly for 
anchorage. 
 Plants lack vascular bundles thus depend on diffusion for movement of materials. 
 They are found in sheltered and moist areas. 
 Their life cycle consists of the two generations which alternate; a gametophyte and 
sporophyte generations. 
Examples are mosses and liverworts which belong to 2 classes; Musci and hepaticae 
respectively. 
External structure of a moss 
DIVISION: TRACHEOPHYTA 
These show alternation of generations. The sporophytes differentiate into roots, stems and leaves with lignified vascular 
tissues that are used for transportation of water and food. This division is divided into 2 sub-divisions; 
Pteridophyta and Spermatophyta. 
 
Pteridophyta: 
This is made up of ferns. Ferns are commonly found 
in shaded places which are damp with cool 
temperature. Some ferns grow on trees as epiphytes. 
Main characteristics 
 Their plant body is called prothallus. 
 The body of a sporophyte fern is divided into 
leaves, stem and roots.  
 The leaves are called fronds while the stems are 
rhizomes.  
 The spore forming structures are called 
sporophyte which occur on the underneath of a 
frond in clusters called sori. 
 The sporophyte is the dominant generation while 
gametophyte generation is short lived. 
 The rhizomes grow horizontally below the soil 
surface. 
 Ferns have well-developed conducting tissues i.e. 
vascular bundles. The xylem also supports the 
plants. 
 They have the adventitious roots which anchor 
the plants into the soil and absorb materials. 
Drawing of the external structure of a fern plant 
 
 
Spermatophyta 
The Spermatophyta comprises of well-developed plants which are adapted to a variety of habitats. The habitats include 
terrestrial and aquatic. The seed are either contained inside the ovary wall or exposed.
[Note: This page contains 2 diagram(s)/image(s)]

--- Page 14 ---
S.1 BIOLOGY TEACHING NOTES 
Page 14 of 51 @Kugonza Arthur H 0701 366474 
General characteristics 
 The body is divided into leaves, stem and root system 
 Plants have complex and well developed vascular tissues. 
 The supporting tissues like xylem, sclerenchyma and collenchyma, are found in leaves, stem and roots. Turgid 
parenchyma cells also provide support. 
 Reproduce sexually. 
 Sporophyte generation is greatly reduced and short-lived (flower) 
 
The sub-division Spermatophyta is subdivided into two classes i.e. Gymnosperms and Angiosperms. 
Gymnosperms (cone bearing plants) 
These are commonly found in high lands/ altitudes areas. They 
show xerophytic characteristics such as sunken stomata, needle-like 
leaves, thick waxy cuticle to prevent or reduce rate of transpiration. 
Examples include pines, cypress, cedar tree, cycads, etc. 
Gymnosperms refers to plants whose seeds are not enclosed. 
Main characteristics 
 They are non-flowering plants. 
 Their seeds are found in the cone scale. 
 Have needle like leaves which reduce the rate of transpiration. 
 Found in high altitudes and can carry out photosynthesis at low 
temperatures. 
Angiosperms (flowering plants) 
These are flowering plants where seeds are 
enclosed in the ovary of the fruits. 
General characteristics 
 They are flowering plants  
 Their seeds are enclosed in the ovary 
from where the fruits develop 
 The reproductive organs are found within 
the flower 
This class is divided into two sub-classes; 
Monocotyledons and Dicotyledons. 
 
Monocotyledons 
These are mainly grass family. Examples include 
wheat, rice, barley, star grass, sorghum, maize, 
millet sugarcane etc. 
Distinguishing characteristics 
 Seeds have one cotyledon 
 Have fibrous root system 
 Have parallel veins in their leaves 
 Vascular bundles are scattered in the stem 
cross section 
 Flowers are held on an inflorescence. 
 
Dicotyledons 
These include herbs, shrubs and trees. Shrubs and trees 
have stems with supporting tissues such as xylem. 
Examples include beans, jacaranda, hibiscus, etc. 
Distinguishing characteristics 
 Have seeds with two cotyledons 
 They have tap root system. 
 Have network (reticulate) venation. 
 Leaves are generally broad and short. 
 Vascular bundles are radially arranged in the stem cross 
section. 
 Have vascular cambium for secondary thickening. 
 The floral parts are in fours or fives or in their multiples.
[Note: This page contains 1 diagram(s)/image(s)]

--- Page 15 ---
S.1 BIOLOGY TEACHING NOTES 
Page 15 of 51 @Kugonza Arthur H 0701 366474 
KINGDOM ANIMALIA 
Kingdom Animalia has several phyla each of which consists of a variety of organisms. The phyla include: 
Phylum 
Examples 
1. Porifera 
sponges 
2. Coelenterata 
hydra 
3. Platyhelminthes 
‘Flat’ worms e.g. tapeworm 
4. Nematoda 
‘Round’ worms e.g. Askaris lumbricoides 
5. Annelida 
‘Ringed’ worms e.g. earth worms 
6. Mollusca 
snails 
7. Echinodermata 
star fish 
8. Arthropoda 
cockroach 
9. Chordata 
man 
 
Phylum 
 
characteristics 
1. Phylum: Porifera – the 
sponges 
The phylum is made of many 
types of sponges 
 
Sponge 
 Possess simple bodies which are hollow and sac-like. 
 They are marine dwellers 
 They have only one opening in their bodies. 
 
2. Phylum: Coelenterata 
(Cnidarians)  
They include the following; 
the 
jelly 
fish, 
sea 
anemones, 
hydra 
and 
corals. 
Jelly fish 
 They are aquatic or marine organisms. 
 They have soft bodies which are sac-like with body 
cavity called enteron. 
 
3. Phylum: 
Platyhelminthes 
(flat 
worms) 
The phylum consists of 
flukes and tape worms. 
 
 
Tapeworm 
 They have dorso-ventrally flattened body 
 They have bilateral body symmetry. 
 They are damp, moist or aquatic dwellers. 
The phylum has 3 main classes; 
i) Turbellaria e.g. Planarians  
 
They are free living flat worms that live in wet soils, 
fresh water and seas.  
 
They have many simple eyes and cilia on the under 
surface of the body used for movement over stones 
and weeds. 
ii) Trematoda e.g. Liver fluke 
 
They live as endo parasites in cattle and man. 
 
They have suckers for attachment on to the host. 
 
They suck digested food from the host. 
iii) Cestoda e.g Tape worm 
 
They live as endo-parasites in the gut of man, muscles 
of goats, cows and pigs. 
 
They have suckers and hooks for feeding and 
attachment on to the host. 
 
They have elongated bodies consisting of segments 
called proglotids. 
 
They absorb digested food directly from the host. 
Liver fluke 
 
4. Phylum: Nematoda ( round worms) 
The phylum has the examples like hookworms, pin 
worms, guinea worms, whip worms and ascaris 
lumbricoides. 
  
 They have unsegmented bodies. 
 They have elongated and cylindrical bodies pointed at 
both ends. 
 Some are parasitic and others are free living.
[Note: This page contains 4 diagram(s)/image(s)]

--- Page 16 ---
S.1 BIOLOGY TEACHING NOTES 
Page 16 of 51 @Kugonza Arthur H 0701 366474 
Askaris lumbricoides 
 
5. Phylum: Annelida (ringed worm) 
These are the ringed or segmented worms e.g. 
earthworms, leeches, rag worms, lugworms, etc. 
The earthworm 
 
 The body wall has three body layers of cells (triploblastic) i.e. 
ectoderm (outer), mesoderm (middle) and endoderm (inner). 
 They are hermaphrodites and reproduce sexually but they often 
promote cross fertilization. 
 They have bodies divided into section called septae. 
 Externally the body shows ring- like segments. 
 
 
6. Phylum:  Mollusca 
Examples include snails, 
slugs, 
octopus, 
squids, 
mussels and oysters. 
 
Garden snail 
 
They have soft bodies. 
 
Nearly 
all 
have 
shells 
with 
exception of octopus and squids. 
7. Phylum: Echinodermata 
The organisms are sea dwellers. Examples are bristles star, 
sea urchin, sea lilies, sea star, star fish, sea cucumber. 
Star fish 
 
The body wall has three body layers of cells 
(triploblastic) i.e. ectoderm (outer), mesoderm (middle) 
and endoderm (inner). 
 
They have feet for locomotion and capturing the food 
(feeding). 
 
They have spiny skin which is a hard plate. 
8. Phylum: Arthropoda  
Arthropoda has a wide variety of animals. 
 
They have a segmented body. 
 
They have jointed limbs and appendages. 
 
They have an exoskeleton. 
The exoskeleton is made up of chitin which is fairly hard but flexible. The exoskeleton has the following functions: 
 
It provides support to terrestrial arthropods.  
 
It provides points of attachment for the muscles. 
 
It prevents the body from drying by secreting wax.  
 
It protects the organism from mechanical injury. 
 
Phylum Arthropoda comprises of classes Crustacea, Chilopoda, Diplopoda, Insecta and Arachnida. 
1. Class: Crustacea 
Examples of members of the class Crustacea 
include crabs, crayfish, lobsters, prawns, 
woodlice and shrimps. 
 
 
Distinguishing characteristics 
 Their body is covered by a carapace. A carapace is a hard shell. 
 Their body is divided into two parts. Their head and thorax are fused to 
form a cephalothorax. The second division is the abdomen. 
 They have a pair of compound eyes each on a raised stalk. 
 
2. Class: Chilopoda 
Chilopoda is made up of centipedes.  
Distinguishing characteristics 
 Centipedes have a clearly defined head while the rest of the 
segments are similar. 
 They have dorso-ventrally flattened body.
[Note: This page contains 5 diagram(s)/image(s)]

--- Page 17 ---
S.1 BIOLOGY TEACHING NOTES 
Page 17 of 51 @Kugonza Arthur H 0701 366474 
 They have a pair of antenna 
 They have one pair of mouthparts known as mandibles. 
 They have one pair of legs on each body segment. 
 They are carnivorous. 
3. Class: Diplopoda 
Class Diplopoda is made up of millipedes.  
 
Distinguishing characteristics 
 Millipedes have a clearly defined head. All the other body 
segments are similar. 
 They have a cylindrical body. 
 They have one pair of antennae. 
 They have one pair of mouthparts, namely the mandibles. 
 They have two pairs of legs on each body segment. 
 They are herbivorous. 
Millipedes are common in damp places. 
4. Class: Arachnida 
Arachnids are terrestrial arthropods. Examples of 
arachnids include spiders, ticks, scorpions and mites. 
Drawing of a tick 
 
Distinguishing characteristics 
 Arachnida have two main body parts. The head and thorax are 
fused to form the cephalothorax and the second part is the 
abdomen. 
 They have simple eyes. 
 They have four pairs (8 legs) of walking legs. 
 They carry out gaseous exchange by the lung books or trachea. 
 
 
 
 
5. Class: Insecta 
Insects are the largest group of arthropods. 
They occupy every habitat on earth in such places as 
air, soil and water. However, they mainly inhabit 
terrestrial habitats. Examples of insects include 
grasshoppers, houseflies, butterflies, bees, and 
termites. 
 
i) 
Insects have three body parts, namely: the head, thorax, and 
abdomen. 
ii) They have three pairs of walking legs on the thorax. One pair of 
walking legs per segment of the thorax. 
iii) They have a thorax divided into three segments i.e. prothorax, 
mesothorax and metathorax. 
 
 
 
 
Some common orders of insects 
Order 
Characteristic feather of the order 
(The word ptera means wing). 
Examples 
Dictyoptera  
 
Have hard outer wings and soft membranous 
inner wings. 
Cockroach and praying mantis. 
Hymenoptera  
Have two pairs of membranous wings. 
Wasps, bees and ants. 
Coleoptera 
Outer wings modified to form horny covers 
overlying the inner membranous wings. 
Beetles and weevils.
[Note: This page contains 10 diagram(s)/image(s)]

--- Page 18 ---
S.1 BIOLOGY TEACHING NOTES 
Page 18 of 51 @Kugonza Arthur H 0701 366474 
Isoptera  
Equal length of the two pairs of wings (swarming 
adult termite). 
Termites 
Lepidoptera  
 
Have membranous wings covered with scales. 
Have sucking mouth parts. 
Moths and butterflies 
Diptera  
 
Single pair of wings.  
In houseflies, second pair is reduced into halteres 
for balancing. 
Mosquitoes and houseflies 
Orthoptera  
 
Have 
leathery 
straight 
fore 
wings 
and 
membranous hind wings. 
Have biting mouth parts. 
Grasshopper, locusts and crickets 
 
9. Phylum: Chordata 
Chordate refers to animals which possess a notochord. 
Main characteristics 
 The presence of a notochord during the early stages of development. 
 They have bilateral symmetry. 
 The body is composed of head, trunk and usually a tail at some stage of development. 
 Possess a hollow dorsal nerve cord. 
This phylum mainly consists of the vertebrates and they are divided into 5 classes. The 5 classes include the following;  
Class 
Characteristics  
1) Pisces (fishes) e.g. tilapia and the Nile perch,  
 
 
 
 They have a streamlined body. 
 They have scales on their skin. 
 They breathe using gills. 
 They have fins for swimming. 
 Their eggs are fertilized outside the body (external 
fertilization). 
Qn: how is the fish adapted to its mode of life? 
 
2) Amphibia, e.g. newt, salamander, toad and frog. 
The word amphibian comes from two greek words: 
amphi- (both) and bios (life). 
 
They spend part of their life (as larvae or tadpoles) in water, 
and part of their life as adults on land. 
 
They live on land but require water for breeding. 
 
Amphibians have a soft moist skin without scales. 
 
They have visceral clefts at the larval stages which are 
used as gills for gaseous exchange. Adult amphibians use 
lungs for gaseous exchange. 
 
Amphibians have middle and an inner ear but no external 
ear. However, they have a tympanic membrane also called 
the ear drum 
 
3) Reptilia 
Reptiles are mainly terrestrial with the exception of 
the turtle which lives in water. 
 Examples of reptiles include the lizard, snake, 
crocodile, tortoise and turtle. 
 
 
 
 
Reptiles have dry skin with horny scales 
 
Most reptiles have pentadactyl limbs 
 
Some reptiles have a three-chambered heart; two auricles 
and one ventricle. Others have four chambered heart for 
example crocodile.
[Note: This page contains 3 diagram(s)/image(s)]

--- Page 19 ---
S.1 BIOLOGY TEACHING NOTES 
Page 19 of 51 @Kugonza Arthur H 0701 366474 
Lizard  
 
snake 
 
4) Aves - birds 
Aves refer to birds. Examples of birds include eagle, 
ducks, flamingo, heron, dove etc.  
 The skin of birds is covered by feathers, except the legs 
which are covered by horny scales.  The feathers keep the 
bird warm and also used for flight. 
 They have skeleton is made of hollow bones. The hollow and 
light bones reduce weight and enable flight. 
 They have two pairs of pentadactyl limbs. The fore limbs 
modified into wings for flight while the hind are feet for 
walking or swimming. 
 They have internal fertilization.  
 They lay eggs in calcareous shells. 
5) Mammalia 
Mammals comprise a wide variety of animals. 
Examples of terrestrial mammals are cows, pigs, 
goats, monkeys, rats, lions etc. and the aquatic 
mammals are seals, dolphins and whales. 
 
 The skins of mammals are covered by hairs or fur.  
 The skin has sweat glands called sebaceous glands.  
 They have an endoskeleton made up of bones. 
 They have four types of teeth for feeding. 
 They have muscular diaphragm which separates the thoracic 
organs from the abdominal organs. 
 They have mammary glands.
[Note: This page contains 4 diagram(s)/image(s)]

--- Page 20 ---
S.1 BIOLOGY TEACHING NOTES 
Page 20 of 51 @Kugonza Arthur H 0701 366474 
EXTERNAL FEATURES, LIFE CYCLES AND ECONOMIC IMPORTANCE OF SELECTED INSECTS 
 
A branch of biology that deals with the study of insects is known as entomology. Insects exhibit the longest level of 
organization in animals, i.e. social organization especially in bees, wasps and ants. They are the only invertebrates which 
can fly. They are the most successful arthropods on land. 
Their success on land is attributed to: 
i) 
Evolution of special organs for flight. The wings which enable them to diverse and colonize new areas. 
ii) Impervious exoskeleton made of chitin which has protected them from drying up in the terrestrial environment. 
iii) The small size has enabled them to tackle every place. 
iv) Excretion of toxic products as uric acid has enabled them to conserve water 
v) Tracheal system has enabled them to carry efficient gaseous exchange. 
vi) Disposition of legs enables them to maintain swift locomotion. 
vii) The compound eyes that provide wide field of view for food and enemies. 
viii) The modified mouth parts that suit a variety of food materials. 
ix) The high reproductive rate that ensures enormous number of offsprings is produced. 
 
Some insects are directly beneficial to man these include pollinators like butterfly, moth and bees others are beneficial 
indirectly such as parasitic pest species. 
Harmful insects include those that directly live on man as parasite like lice, flies, mosquitoes, tsetse flies. 
Insects have an exoskeleton which is rigid and prevents expansion of the insect during growth. Before the insect grows, it 
sheds the exoskeleton in a process called moulting (ecdysis).  
Without the exoskeleton, the insect then expands and grows. A new exoskeleton then forms and growth stops until another 
moulting. Successive moults result into formation of a new form of the insect. This is called metamorphosis. 
Insect metamorphosis 
Metamorphosis is the gradual developmental change from the eggs to the adult stage. It occurs in insects and amphibians. 
Insect metamorphosis is divided into two types. 
Complete metamorphosis (holometabolous) 
This is a gradual development change where the eggs 
hatch into larvae and the larvae change into pupa and 
finally the pupa change into an adult. It involves four stages. 
 
Insects, which undergo complete metamorphosis, include 
butterflies, mosquitoes, houseflies, tsetse flies, bees, 
wasps, and beetles. 
Incomplete metamorphosis (hemimetabolous) 
This is the gradual developmental change where an insect 
undergoes only 3 stages, when eggs hatch, they give rise to 
adult-like nymphs which latter change into adults. Insects 
showing this include locusts, grasshoppers, bedbugs, 
cockroaches, and termites. 
 
 
 
COCKROACH (Periplaneta americana) 
Classification 
Taxon 
 
Reason 
Kingdom  
Animalia  
1. Cells lack chlorophyll i.e. cannot make their own food. 
Phylum  
Arthropoda  
1. It has a hard exoskeleton. 
2. It has segmented body. 
3. It has jointed legs.  
Class  
Insecta  
1. It has three pairs of jointed legs. 
2. It has three main body parts i.e. head, thorax and 
abdomen. 
3. It has thorax divided into three segments. 
4. It has one pair of antennae. 
Order  
Dictyoptera  
1. It has a pair of hard fore (outer) wings.
[Note: This page contains 3 diagram(s)/image(s)]

--- Page 21 ---
S.1 BIOLOGY TEACHING NOTES 
Page 21 of 51 @Kugonza Arthur H 0701 366474 
NB: Other insects belonging to the order Dictyoptera include; weevils, beetles, ladybirds. 
Habitat: 
Cockroaches live in dark, dirty and dump warm places e.g. pipes that carry sewage. During day they live in crevices of 
walls, cupboards, underneath drawers and in boxes. 
They are active at night thus referred to as nocturnal. 
External features of a cockroach 
It has a dorsal- ventrally flattened body. 
It is brown in colour.  
It has a hard thick exoskeleton made of chitin.  
The body is made up of three main divisions, each segment of thorax and abdomen consists of dorsal plate tegmen 
(plu:-terga) a ventral plate, sternum (plu-sterna) and two internal plates, pleura. 
 
A drawing of the dorsal view of the cockroach with the left wings spread 
 
 
The head 
 The head is small and pear-shaped. 
 It bears a large kidney- shaped pair of compound eyes.  
 In front of each compound eye lies a long thread- like segmented 
antennae (feelers). These are sensitive to touch, smell and 
vibrations. 
 The head has biting and chewing mouth parts – mandibles for 
cutting and crushing food, maxillary palps for holding food, a 
labrum (upper lip) and labium (lower lip).  
 The head is connected to the thorax by short neck. 
 
Mouth parts of a cockroach 
 
 
The thorax 
 The thorax consists of three segments: the prothorax, the mesothorax and the metathorax. 
 Each of the segments bears a pair of jointed legs on its ventral surface.  
 The legs have sharp spines for defense. 
 Each leg end in a pair of sharp claws for walking on rough surfaces with a soft glandular pad/arolium between 
claws for walking on smooth surfaces.
[Note: This page contains 2 diagram(s)/image(s)]

--- Page 22 ---
S.1 BIOLOGY TEACHING NOTES 
Page 22 of 51 @Kugonza Arthur H 0701 366474 
 The prothorax is the largest of the thoracic segment 
 The paired wings are attached to dorsal surface of mesothorax and metathorax. 
 The anterior (fore) wings are narrow, brown, and leathery and are called elytra or tegmina. They are not used for flight 
but for covering and protection of broad, membranous inner/hind wings when at rest. 
Drawing of the fore wing 
Drawing of the hind wing 
 
 
Exercise 
1. State similarities and differences between the fore wing and hind wing. 
2. How is the leg of a cockroach adapted to its function? 
 
Drawing of the hind leg 
 
The abdomen 
This is made up of 10 segments. Only seven are easily seen 
because tergum of seventh segment covers the 8th and 9th 
segment. 
The flat broad tergum of the 10th segment bears a pair of jointed 
sensory structures the cerci. Males have another additional pair of 
short structures, the styles. 
 
Identification of a cockroach’s sex 
In males, there is a pair of slender styles that are used to hold and 
manipulate the female during copulation. 
In females, there is a pair of boat shaped structures called the 
podical plates used for holding eggs. 
 
Differences between a male and female cockroach: 
Male  
Female  
Has a narrow abdomen 
Has a broader abdomen 
Lack ootheca 
Has ootheca which develops after fertilization.  
Has rod-shaped structures called styles on the 9th 
abdominal segments. 
No styles on the 9th abdominal segment. 
No podical plates. 
Has podical plate for carrying eggs. 
 
 
 
Adaptation of a cockroach to its environment 
i) 
Cockroaches have dorso-ventrally flattened bodies to fit in narrow places. 
ii) Its body is dark brown to camouflage well against a dark background. 
iii) They are smooth and greasy to escape easily from predators.
[Note: This page contains 5 diagram(s)/image(s)]

--- Page 23 ---
S.1 BIOLOGY TEACHING NOTES 
Page 23 of 51 @Kugonza Arthur H 0701 366474 
iv) It has one pair of long antennae for feeling and smelling the area around their body. 
v) Since they are omnivorous, they survive on a wide variety of food materials. 
vi) Their nocturnal emergence renders them less liable to capture. 
vii) They have spines on their legs for defense. 
The life cycle of a cockroach 
A cock roach undergoes incomplete metamorphosis. 
After mating, the fertilized eggs are stored in an egg-case called ootheca. 
This is hard, chitinous structure 1cm long containing eggs in rows of eight 
The female carries ootheca for a number of days before depositing them in dark obscure places. Within a week, it turns 
dark brown. 
After six weeks, the eggs hatch out into young, wingless and colorless cockroaches called nymphs. After 2 weeks they turn 
brown like adult but wingless. 
The nymph grows and undergoes ecdysis, about 7 times and every two ecdysis, the nymphs are called instars. After the 
last ecdysis, the nymph becomes adult cockroach which has a life span of about 2 months. 
 
Economic importance of cockroaches 
 They destroy clothes, books, shoes, furniture and spoil food. 
 They spread disease causing germs such as cholera, 
dysentery etc. especially those in latrines 
 They contaminate food if not properly covered. 
 They are food to some organisms like birds. 
 They are used in biological studies as specimens. 
 
Control of cockroaches 
 Improve personal and public hygiene. 
 Use of environmentally friendly insecticides like 
doom, etc. 
 Use of biological control methods. 
 Polish the walls of the house to close the small 
crevices.  
 
 
CITRUS BUTTERFLY (Papilio demodocus) 
The citrus butterfly is also referred to as lime butterfly because it feeds on lime and citrus. 
Classification: 
Taxon 
 
Reason 
Kingdom  
Animalia  
Cells lack chlorophyll i.e. cannot make their own food. 
Phylum  
Arthropoda  
It has a hard exoskeleton. 
It has segmented body. 
It has jointed legs.  
Class  
Insecta  
It has three pairs of jointed legs. 
It has three main body divisions. 
It has thorax divided into three segments. 
It has one pair of antennae. 
Order  
Lepidoptera  
It has scales on its wings. 
 
Habitat: 
Butterflies live in gardens and forests and where they can feed on nectar from flowers. 
They are active during day. 
External features 
The butterfly has three body divisions the head, thorax, and abdomen. 
The head: 
 The head bears two large, bulging brown compound eyes. 
 There are two simple eyes (ocelli) behind the compound eyes.  
 Above eyes is pair of antenna. These are long jointed and lobbed at the ends. They are 
sense organs for touch and smell. 
 The head also bears the mouth part specially adapted for sucking nectar. The sucking 
part is long, hollow and flexible tube called proboscis. This has a modified pair of 
maxillae which coils up when not in use.  
The head
[Note: This page contains 2 diagram(s)/image(s)]

--- Page 24 ---
S.1 BIOLOGY TEACHING NOTES 
Page 24 of 51 @Kugonza Arthur H 0701 366474 
The thorax: 
 The thorax consists of prothorax, mesothorax and metathorax. These segments are covered by hairs and divisions are 
not clearly seen.  
 Each thoracic segment bears a pair of jointed walking legs.  
 The mesothorax and Metathorax in addition bear a pair of wings each which are large and membranous. 
 When the butterfly is flying, the wings are spread out but when at rest, the wings are raised and held vertically above 
the body. 
The abdomen: 
 The abdomen has ten segments and each bears a pair of spiracles.  
 It is hairy and obscures the segmentation. 
Butterflies and moths 
Butterflies and moths are both members of the Lepidoptera. Although they appear very similar, there are differences in 
their bodies and behaviour. 
Differences between a butterfly and a moth 
Butterfly 
Moth 
It is diurnal i.e. active during day time 
Nocturnal i.e. active during night 
Wings are held upright at rest. 
Wings are held horizontally at rest. 
Small body 
Fatter body 
Body brightly colored 
The body is dull 
Antennae are clubbed or knobbed at the tip 
Antennae are pointed at the tip and feathery 
Pupate above the ground 
Pupate in cocoons or in the soil 
 
The life cycle of a butterfly 
A butterfly undergoes complete metamorphosis. 
A fertilized female butterfly lays eggs. 
The eggs hatch into larvae (caterpillars) after about 3 days. The 
thoracic segments of the larvae bear each a pair of true walking legs and 
abdomen bearing a pair of claspers on the last segment.  
After three weeks of feeding on leaves, the caterpillar develops to pupa. 
The pupa is inactive i.e. it does not feed nor move. 
During pupa stage, there is internal reorganization of tissues involving the 
formation of wing, compound eyes, proboscis and reproductive organs. 
This lasts for about 7-10 days after which the pupa case split along the 
dorsal region. After about 1 hour while the wings expand and dry, the adult 
butterfly emerges ready to fly away, feed, mate and lay more eggs. 
 
 
 
Economic importance of citrus butterfly 
i) 
From the cocoons of butterfly, silk threads are obtained for making silk clothes. 
ii) The larvae spoil the leafy vegetable with fecal drops such as dodo. 
iii) The scales may be respiratory hazards when inhaled. 
iv) The caterpillar stage of a butterfly is significantly destructive on vegetables including crops such as cabbages, 
maize, millet sorghum etc. . . . 
v) Some caterpillars feed on insects thus help in destroying insect pests. 
vi) The butterflies also are of much importance to the farmers in pollinating flowers of the crops. 
 
Control measures against butterflies 
i) 
Apply environmental friendly insecticides 
ii) Use of biological control methods 
iii) By hand picking of the infected leaves and burning or burying them. This destroys the eggs and some leaves.
[Note: This page contains 1 diagram(s)/image(s)]

--- Page 25 ---
S.1 BIOLOGY TEACHING NOTES 
Page 25 of 51 @Kugonza Arthur H 0701 366474 
THE HOUSE FLY (Musca domestica) 
Classification  
Taxon 
 
Reason 
Kingdom  
Animalia  
Cells lack chlorophyll i.e. cannot make their own food. 
Phylum  
Arthropoda  
It has a hard exoskeleton. 
It has segmented body. 
It has jointed legs.  
Class  
Insecta  
It has three pairs of jointed legs. 
It has three main body divisions. 
It has thorax divided into three segments. 
Order  
Diptera   
It has two pairs of membranous wings, hind pair reduced to 
halteres. 
Has sucking and piercing mouth parts. 
 
Examples of members in the order include mosquitoes, housefly, tsetse fly etc. 
Habitat: House flies live in filthy or dirty places such as toilets, dust bins, etc. 
 
External features of a house fly 
The body of the housefly is divided into three main parts, head, thorax and abdomen. 
Its body is hairy. 
 
Drawing of the dorsal view of a house fly 
 
The head: 
 The head bears three simple eyes (ocelli) arranged in 
triangle and on each side is a large or prominent compound 
eye.  
 The antennae are short with three joints with last having 
spine hair.  
 The labium (lower lip) is modified into proboscis for sucking, 
which is expanded at the distal end to form a funnel shape. 
Drawing of the head of a house fly 
 
 
The thorax: 
The thorax is divided into three segments with each segment bearing a pair of jointed, hairy legs. 
The thorax bears two pairs of wings, one pair is broad and membranous for flight. The other pair of wings is reduced to 
halteres for balancing the house fly.
[Note: This page contains 2 diagram(s)/image(s)]

--- Page 26 ---
S.1 BIOLOGY TEACHING NOTES 
Page 26 of 51 @Kugonza Arthur H 0701 366474 
 
 
Drawing of the hind leg of a house fly 
 
 
 
 
Life cycle of a housefly 
The housefly undergoes complete metamorphosis.  
After mating, the female housefly lays eggs in batches. The eggs are laid on rotting 
matter such as meat or faeces, where it is warm and moist. 
After about 8-24 hours, the eggs hatch into larvae. The larvae (maggots) are white and 
conical shaped.  
After 5 days and shading its cuticle twice. It then moves to a drier region of the meat or 
faeces and pupates. 
The cuticle hardens, darkens and becomes brown to form the pupa case. This forms a 
protective covering as internal reorganization of tissues takes place inside. After the 
pupa case bursts open, the adult fly emerges. The wings expand and harden and after 
a few hours, the fly flies away. 
 
 
 
Economic importance of house flies 
i) 
They feed on faeces and manure heaps, hence help in garbage disposal. 
ii) They are vectors of diseases i.e. spread or transmit diseases such as dysentery, cholera, red eyes & trachoma. 
iii) It is a source of food for some organisms such as chameleons. 
iv) They are specimens for study purposes. 
Control of house flies and prevention of diseases they spread 
i) 
Spraying with an insecticide such as pyrethrum to kill the adult. 
ii) Proper disposal of faeces in latrines with covers, so that flies cannot get to the waste to lay eggs. 
iii) Washing hands with soap and clean water after visiting the latrine and before eating or preparing food. 
iv) Disposing of wastes in such a way that flies cannot reach them. E.g. burning or burying them. 
v) Covering or storing food properly so that flies cannot settle on it. 
 
THE MOSQUITO 
Classification: 
Taxon 
 
Reason 
Kingdom  
Animalia  
Cells lack chlorophyll i.e. cannot make their own food. 
Phylum  
Arthropoda  
It has a hard exoskeleton. 
It has segmented body. 
It has jointed legs.  
Class  
Insecta  
It has three pairs of jointed legs. 
It has three main body divisions. 
It has thorax divided into three segments. 
Order  
Diptera  
It has two pairs of membranous wings, one pair reduced to halteres.
[Note: This page contains 3 diagram(s)/image(s)]

--- Page 27 ---
S.1 BIOLOGY TEACHING NOTES 
Page 27 of 51 @Kugonza Arthur H 0701 366474 
 
The mosquitoes are majorly found in 
the tropics and are best known for 
carrying disease germs 
They belong to the order Diptera and 
the important three genera are: 
i) 
Anopheles that are vectors of 
malaria. 
ii) Aedes which are vectors of 
yellow fever and dengue fever. 
iii) Culex, 
the 
vector 
of 
elephantiasis. 
 
Mode of life of a mosquito 
 Hates light and like resting in dark places during day and comes out to feed at night 
They feed mainly within late evening and early morning (day and dawn) 
Male mosquitoes feed on plant juices and nectar while the female feed on blood. 
Life cycle of a Mosquito 
It begins with mating and internal fertilization and is a complete metamorphosis. The difference however are observed 
for both anopheles and culex mosquitoes. 
 
 
Economic importance of mosquitoes 
They carry malarial parasites which cause malaria. These germs are carried by a female anopheles. The disease 
causing parasite is referred to as plasmodium. The four types of plasmodia are; 
1. Plasmodium malariae                  2. Plasmodium vivax 
3. Plasmodium ovale                       4. Plasmodium falciparum 
Symptoms of malaria 
 A Person with malaria has very high fever. 
 Headaches. 
 Sometimes vomiting. 
 Pain in the joints and sometimes the general body.  
 There is alternate cold and shivering spells as well 
as hot sweating. 
 Loss of appetite. 
 Anemia. 
 Enlarged liver and spleen. 
Malaria may cause convulsions and sometimes death in children and abortions in pregnant women due to destruction of 
red blood cells by the parasites.
[Note: This page contains 2 diagram(s)/image(s)]

--- Page 28 ---
S.1 BIOLOGY TEACHING NOTES 
Page 28 of 51 @Kugonza Arthur H 0701 366474 
Control of spread of malaria 
Of these diseases malaria is probably becoming the most serious and is increasingly becoming a killer of such great as 
AIDS.  
This is mainly because the parasites causing it are becoming resistant to drugs like chloroquine which in the past have 
been very effective on malaria. 
As things stand now, effective control of the mosquito is as much prerequisite to control malaria as it is to combat the 
disease. 
 
Appropriate measures include; 
 Destroying the breeding places where larvae develop from by draining or applying a film of oil over the water 
surface to prevent oxygen reaching the mosquito larva. 
 Burning or burying all empty containers to prevent water from collecting during the rainy season. 
 Clearing bushes around homestead. Mosquitoes like to rest and breed on them during the rainy season. 
 Biological control which involves the introduction of fish into water bodies which feed on the larvae and pupa. 
 Mosquitoes can be killed by spraying with insecticides using special sprayers. 
 Removal of small water containers such as old tins, bottles, and drainage channels, so as to reduce on breeding 
sites. 
 protecting our bodies from mosquito bites by using mosquito nets at night as well as wearing clothes which cover 
both legs and arms in the evening 
 Applying mosquito repellant cream to the body. 
 
Aedes species carry a virus which causes Dengue. It also carries germs which cause yellow fever. 
The Culex species carry filarial worms which cause elephantiasis. It is not a killing disease but causes discomfort due 
to large swelling of the legs and/ arm. 
Differences between anopheles and culex 
Anopheles 
Culex 
i) Eggs are laid singly 
Eggs are in rafts 
ii) Eggs have air floats to keep buoyant 
Eggs have air float 
iii) Eggs are boat shaped 
Eggs are cigar shapes 
iv) Larva lies parallel to the water surface 
Lies at an angle to the water surface 
v) Larva has a pair of spiracles for breathing 
Larva has siphon for breathing 
vi) Adult at rest lies at an angle to the object 
At rest lies parallel to the object 
 
 
THE HONEY BEE (Apis mellifera) 
Classification 
Taxon 
 
Reason 
Kingdom  
Animalia  
Cells lack chlorophyll i.e. cannot make their own food. 
Phylum  
Arthropoda  
It has a hard exoskeleton. 
It has segmented body. 
It has jointed legs.  
Class  
Insecta  
It has three pairs of jointed legs. 
It has three main body divisions. 
It has thorax divided into three segments. 
Order  
Hymenoptera  
It has membranous wings. 
 
Other examples of insects under hymenoptera include bee swamps, ants, gull wasps, etc. 
Generally, bees are social insects and live in colonies (large numbers) in bee hives. They show division of labor among 
the castes for instance; 
The queen produces other bees. 
The drone fertilizes the queen. 
The workers have a number of duties among which include collecting food and cleaning the hive.

--- Page 29 ---
S.1 BIOLOGY TEACHING NOTES 
Page 29 of 51 @Kugonza Arthur H 0701 366474 
External features on the honey bee especially worker include: 
 The head is not fixed on the thorax and therefore it is free to move (mobile). 
 The compound eyes are prominent. In addition to these are simple eyes which are three in number. 
 The antennae are short and segmented.  
 The mouth parts are a modified proboscis which is curved at the distal end. It is used for lapping during feeding and 
also used for construction, the glossa also modified for sucking. 
The features on the thorax include pairs of legs which differ in various aspects as shown below. 
 
The fore leg 
The fore leg has a pollen comb located at the end of the 
tibia. This is used for cleaning pollen off the head. 
Drawing of the entire fore leg 
 
The middle leg 
These legs possess a hair like structure, prong at the 
distal end of the tibia. The prong is used for scooping 
pollen grains out of the pollen basket on the hind leg. 
Drawing of the middle leg cut off from the femur 
 
Hind leg 
The leg is hairy with pollen baskets, which are responsible 
for carrying pollen grains. 
These have pollen baskets on their tibia which are used for 
carrying the collected pollen grain to the hive. They also 
possess tufts of hairs on the tarsus called pollen brush 
which are used for cleaning pollen off the body into the 
basket on the other leg. 
 
Drawing of the hind leg without the coxa 
 
1. The Worker bees: 
The workers do not lay eggs because they are infertile females. They are the smallest in size among the bees. They 
perform the following duties among others: 
i) 
Cleaning the bee hive by eating away dirt and rubbish. 
ii) Feeding the old grubs (larva) on honey and pollen. 
iii) Packing and storing honey and pollen in the cells of the honey comb. 
iv) Feeding the young grubs on their milk produced by their own salivary glands. 
v) Producing wax from their wax glands. 
vi) Field work to collect food and pollen. 
vii) Guarding the bee hive. 
 
2. The drone bees: 
These are male bees. They are larger than workers and are usually very few in the hive. Their role is to fertilize the 
queen after which they are stung to death by workers. 
 
3. The queen. 
This is the fertile female bee. It is usually one in the hive. Its work is to produce all the other bees in the hive.
[Note: This page contains 3 diagram(s)/image(s)]

--- Page 30 ---
S.1 BIOLOGY TEACHING NOTES 
 
Page 30 of 51 @Kugonza Arthur H 0701 366474 
 
Life cycle of a bee 
 
 
Economic importance of bees 
 Source of honey which is a rich food (carbohydrate) 
 Pollinate plants most of which provide food for man. 
 Provide wax used in industry to make candles, varnish, shoe polish etc. 
 Their honey is a drug for many diseases like cough. 
 The worker bee-stings inflict irritation on our bodies. 
 
THE DICHOTOMOUS KEY 
This is an artificial way of classifying specimens, basing on observable features. It involves dividing the specimens 
provided into two groups, which are further subdivided into two, until a single specimen remains in a group. 
Only features observable and contrasting are the ones used, i.e. avoid using the word ‘not’ when stating an observable 
feature. 
 
Queen
after being fertilized by 
drone, lays
fertilized eggs
Larvae
fed on royal jelly for first few 
days
royal jelly diet continued 
Pupa in largest cells of 
comb; conical and near egde
Queens
fertile female with reduced 
mouth parts
royal jelly replaced by honey 
and predigested pollen
Pupa in smallest hexagonal 
cells of comb
Workers
sterile females 
unfertilzed eggs 
(parthenogenesis)
Larvae
fed for first few days on royal 
jelly, then on honey and 
predigested pollen.
Pupa
in larger hexagonal cells of 
comb
Drones
fertile males with reduced 
mouth parts
[Note: This page contains 15 diagram(s)/image(s)]

--- Page 31 ---
S.1 BIOLOGY TEACHING NOTES 
 
Page 31 of 51 @Kugonza Arthur H 0701 366474 
 
Characteristics considered in arthropods 
 
Wings i.e. present or absent. 
 
Number of wings i.e. one or two pairs. 
 
Number of legs i.e. 6, 8, or more than 8. 
 
Number of main body parts i.e. 2 or 3. 
 
Compound eyes i.e. present or absent. 
 
Antennae i.e. present or absent. 
 
Abdomen texture i.e. smooth or rough/hairy or non-hairy. 
 
Antennae shape i.e. pointed or clubbed (knobbed) 
 
Anal cerci i.e. present or absent. 
 
Simple eyes i.e. present or absent. 
 
Note: soldier termites lack both simple and compound eyes. 
Methods of constructing a dichotomous key 
You should use contrasting characteristics in each lead. Before constructing the dichotomous key, a flow chart should 
be made. 
Consider four specimens: 
Honey bee (A) 
Cock roach (B) 
Termite (C) 
House fly (D) 
Flow chart 
 
 
The dichotomous key would then be as follows; 
1
 
a) Has sucking mouth parts ………………………………………………………………….go to 2 
b) Has biting mouth parts …………………………………………………………………..go to 3 
2
 
a) Has two pairs of wings ………………………………………………………………….D 
b) Has one pair of wings ……………………………………………………………………A 
3
 
a) Has spines on legs ……………………………………………………………………….B 
b) Has no spines on legs ……………………………………………………………………C 
Activity: 
Provide students with any arthropods (more than 4) to construct a dichotomous key in groups while in class.
[Note: This page contains 1 diagram(s)/image(s)]

--- Page 32 ---
S.1 BIOLOGY TEACHING NOTES 
 
Page 32 of 51 @Kugonza Arthur H 0701 366474 
 
FLOWERING PLANTS 
These are plants that bear flowers. A typical flowering plant is composed of 2 systems i.e: Root system and Shoot 
system 
The two systems are made up of two categories of organs i.e.  
Reproductive organs: these produce fruits and seeds. They are directly involved in the reproduction of the plant. 
Vegetative organs: these are not directly involved in the reproduction. They include roots, stems and leaves. 
Structure of a flowering plant 
 
 
ROOTS 
A root is a descending portion of the axis of the plant and develops from the radical of the embryo during germination. 
Types of roots 
1. Tap root system 
This consists of a main root growing straight down wards from the 
radicle. It gives rise to side roots called lateral roots. Tap root system is a 
characteristic of dicotyledonous plants. 
 
2. Fibrous root system 
This is the root system without a main root and all roots arise from the 
same point of the base of the stem. The roots are almost of the same size 
and a characteristic of monocotyledonous plants. 
Functions of roots 
i) They anchor the plant firmly in the soil. 
ii) They absorb water and mineral salts from the ground to the plant. 
iii) They conduct the absorbed water and mineral salts up to the stems and leaves. 
iv) In some plants, roots are modified into root tubers which store food e.g. cassava. 
v) Some roots are modified for breathing e.g. white mangrove.
[Note: This page contains 4 diagram(s)/image(s)]

--- Page 33 ---
S.1 BIOLOGY TEACHING NOTES 
 
Page 33 of 51 @Kugonza Arthur H 0701 366474 
 
MODIFIED ROOTS 
1. Storage roots 
These are thick fleshly and succulent roots. They contain stored food like sugar and starch. The roots are modified 
as root tubers e.g. carrots, cassava and sweet potato roots. 
 
2. Breathing roots 
These are found on some plants growing in swampy areas e.g. white 
mangrove. Its roots grow up through the mud to the air. The root parts above 
the mud are spongy and absorb air from the atmosphere. The main root of 
such plants bears branch roots. 
 
3. Stilt roots 
These roots develop from the main stem in certain plants such as red mangrove which grow in muddy areas. Stilt 
roots provide additional support to the plant. 
 
 
4. Prop roots: 
These are found growing on plants such as maize, sorghum and sugar canes. 
They develop from the nodes of the stem close to the soil surface. They provide 
extra support by holding the plant firmly to the soil surface. 
 
5. Buttress roots 
These are large thick roots growing from the base of certain stems e.g. Mvule trees, silk cotton, etc. They provide 
extra support to the plant by anchoring it firmly in the soil. 
 
 
6. Clasping roots 
These are roots growing from the nodes of climbing stems such as figs 
(mituba trees), vanilla and orchids. They secret a sticky substance which 
dries up in air. This helps such plants to cling on to other plants for 
support.
[Note: This page contains 6 diagram(s)/image(s)]

--- Page 34 ---
S.1 BIOLOGY TEACHING NOTES 
 
Page 34 of 51 @Kugonza Arthur H 0701 366474 
 
7. Epiphytic roots 
These grow on certain plants called epiphytes. Epiphytes are plants which grow and get support from other plants. 
These roots hang freely in the atmosphere. They absorb moisture from the atmosphere.  
 
8. Sucking roots 
These are roots found growing on certain parasitic plants e.g. figs (mituba). They grow from the stem and penetrate the 
host plant. These roots absorb water, mineral salts and organic food compounds from the host plant. 
 
INTERNAL STRUCTURE OF A ROOT (LONGITUDINAL SECTION) 
In a longitudinal section through the growing end of a root, 
its parts are divided into 4 main zone or regions: 
1) Root cap 
2) Region of cell division (meristematic region) 
3) Region of cell elongation 
4) Region of cell differentiation (maturation) 
1) Root cap 
This is found at the tip of the root and is made up of 
loosely arranged cells. It protects the tender apex of a root 
from mechanical damage as it makes its way through the 
soil. It’s absent in aquatic plants. 
 
1) Region of cell division 
This is the growing apex of the root lying just behind the root cap. The cells in this region undergo repeated divisions 
to form new root cap and new cells that increase the length of the root. 
2) Region of cell elongation 
This is the region lying just above the region of cell division. The cells in this region absorb water and develop vacuoles, 
the cells being elastic, elongated and enlarged. This causes an overall growth in the length of the root. 
3) Region of cell differentiation 
This is also called the region of absorption. The characteristic feature of this region is the development of root hairs. The 
cells in this region acquire specific shapes and functions thus they are said to be differentiated or specialized. 
NB: the region behind the zone of differentiation is the oldest part of the root. It has permanent tissues and is covered by 
a layer of cork which prevents the evaporation of water from the roots. 
 
Transverse section of a root 
The transverse or cross section of most young roots has two regions 
 The outer cylinder (cortex) 
 The central cylinder (stele) 
The vascular tissues are composed of xylem and phloem and may contain cambium and pith tissues.  
Monocot root 
Dicot root
[Note: This page contains 4 diagram(s)/image(s)]

--- Page 35 ---
S.1 BIOLOGY TEACHING NOTES 
 
Page 35 of 51 @Kugonza Arthur H 0701 366474 
 
 
Root hairs: absorb water and mineral salts from the soil. 
 
Periferous layer: protects the cortex cells from mechanical damage. 
Prevents loss of water from the cortex cells since it is impermeable to water.  
 
Cortex:  contains cells that provides mechanical strength to the root. 
 
Xylem is the water conducting tissue through which water and mineral salts pass from the soil upwards to the stem 
and leaves. 
 
Phloem is the food conducting tissue that carries manufactured food from the upper parts of the plant mainly leaves 
and distributes it to various parts of the root. 
 
Cambium: causes secondary thickening of the root. It adds all secondary xylem cells on its inner side and 
secondary phloem cells on its outer side by continuous cell division during growing season. 
 
Pith: is a small area in the centre of the monocot root. It is composed of parenchyma cells for strengthening the 
root. It’s normally absent in most roots because the centre is normally occupied by the xylem. It also stores food and 
water for the plant. 
 
Differences between transverse section of monocot and dicot roots 
Dicot root 
Monocot 
1. Has no pith. 
Has pith. 
2. Can form a ring of cambium. 
Cannot form a ring of cambium. 
3. The xylem is star-shaped occupying the central part. 
The xylem and phloem alternates forming a ring. 
 
 
STEMS  
This is the ascending portion of the plant axis that develops from the plumule of the embryo. It has the following 
characteristic features; 
i) 
It bears leaves at the nodes. 
ii) It has nodes and internodes.  
iii) It has buds in the axills called axillary buds. 
iv) It has flowers or fruits. 
v) Its terminal bud is located at the tip of the stem. 
NB: the axill is the angle between the leaf and the stem. 
 
Functions of stems 
a) Primary functions 
i) 
They hold leaves in the best position for receiving enough sun light needed in the process of photosynthesis. 
ii) They conduct water and mineral salts from roots to leaves and manufactured food from leaves to other parts. 
iii) They hold flowers and fruits in good position so that they can be easily pollinated or dispersed. 
iv) When stems are young, they carry out photosynthesis thus making food for the plant. 
v) Stems have lenticels (pores) that facilitate gaseous exchange.  
 
b) Secondary functions 
i) 
Some stems may specialize in storing food and water e.g. stem tubers like corms, Irish potatoes, rhizomes and 
sugar cane. 
ii) 
Protect a plant against browsers by forming thorns, spines or prickles. 
iii) 
Vegetative reproduction or propagation through the stem cuttings e.g. cassava and sweet potatoes. 
iv) 
They support the plant by climbing stem tendrils e.g. pasum pea (wild pea). 
 
TYPES OF STEMS 
1) Erect stems 
These can support themselves in an upright position. They may be woody or herbaceous.  
Woody stems: These have a high content of lignin and are hard. They are found in shrubs and trees. 
Herbaceous stems: These contain no or less woody materials e.g. tomatoes, rice. The herbs are shorter than grass. 
2) Weak stems 
These can’t support themselves upright but either creep or climb for support.

--- Page 36 ---
S.1 BIOLOGY TEACHING NOTES 
 
Page 36 of 51 @Kugonza Arthur H 0701 366474 
 
3) Underground stems 
These are modified stems which remain permanently underground. They are often swollen and serve as food storage 
organs. 
NB:  
 Annual herbs only live for one year 
 Bi – annual herbs live for two years 
 Perennial herbs live for many years 
 
MODIFICATION OF STEMS 
Weak stems 
1. Twinning stems (twinners) 
These are stems that grow ascending spirally around a support. They are 
usually long and slender e.g. Dutch man’s pipe and lianas. 
 
2. Climbing stems 
These are stems that grow clinging to the support of 
other plants by means of tendrils. Tendrils are thin 
wire-like spirally coiled branches of certain stems. 
They may be modified at axillary buds e.g. in passion 
fruit plants or terminal buds 
 
3. Creeping stems (creepers) 
These are long thin stems which grow along the surface of the ground, giving off roots at certain intervals of the nodes. 
Types of creeping stems are; 
i) Runners 
This is a slender trailing stem lying flat on the ground possessing 
long internodes. A runner arises as an axillary bud and creeps some 
distance away from the mother plant and grow into another plant 
e.g. oxalis. 
 
 
ii) Offset stems 
This is a horizontal thickened short stem. It originates from the axil of the 
leaf and grows flat on the ground. It produces many leaves above and a 
cluster of roots below e.g. water hyacinth and water lettuce. 
 
 
4. Sucker  
A sucker is a creeping stem that grows obliquely upwards, directly giving 
rise to a leafy shoot. E.g. banana, pineapple, sisal plant, etc.
[Note: This page contains 5 diagram(s)/image(s)]

--- Page 37 ---
S.1 BIOLOGY TEACHING NOTES 
 
Page 37 of 51 @Kugonza Arthur H 0701 366474 
 
Underground stems 
There are four types of underground stems namely: Rhizome, Corm, Stem tuber and Bulb. 
1. Rhizomes  
This is a horizontal thick underground stem having adventitious roots growing from the lower side of the nodes. It has 
terminal buds which develop into aerial shoots. It bears buds in axils of the reduced brown leaves called scale leaves. 
Rhizomes store a lot food for the plant. Some also act as organs for vegetative propagation e.g ginger, canalily, couch 
grass and Solomon’s seal.  
 
2. Stem tuber 
This is a short, fleshy underground stem swollen with large amounts of stored food. It has scale leaves and axillary buds 
which form the “eyes” e.g. Irish potato, yams. 
 
3. Stolon 
A stolon is a horizontally growing stem that roots at the nodes and develops buds that grow into new plants. E.g. straw 
berry. 
 
4. Bulb  
A bulb is short conical-shaped underground stem comprising of thick fleshy leaves arranged in concentric circles. The 
thick fleshy leaves store food for the plant and are protected by outer dry brown leaves called scale leaves. 
A terminal bud lies at the top of the stem and give rise to the aerial shoot. Axillary buds are situated between the leaf 
bases. Onions, garlic, tuberose, etc. are bulbs. 
Structure of a bulb (onion)
[Note: This page contains 5 diagram(s)/image(s)]

--- Page 38 ---
S.1 BIOLOGY TEACHING NOTES 
 
Page 38 of 51 @Kugonza Arthur H 0701 366474 
 
5. Corm 
A corm is a swollen fleshy underground stem that grows in a vertical 
direction. It is round-shaped and somehow flattened from the top to 
bottom. It has a terminal bud lying at the top of the stem and has scale 
leaves a rising from the nodes. Its roots grow randomly from the stem. 
Examples of corms are coco yams and yams. 
 
 
 
 
INTERNAL STRUCTURE OF STEMS 
 
Transverse section through a dicot stem 
Transverse section through a monocot stem 
 
Internally stems have 3 main tissues; 
1. Epidermis  
It comprises of a single layer of cells which are brick-shaped. The outer wall of these cells is thickened by cutin, a waxy 
material which forms the outside skin of a stem called cuticle. 
 It protects the stem against water loss. 
 It also protects the inner tissues of the stem from mechanical injury. 
 It prevents entry of bacteria and germs into stem. 
2. Cortex 
This is the part of the stem between the epidermis and the vascular bundles. It’s made up of collenchyma, 
parenchyma and endodermis. 
i) Collenchyma  
This is the outer tissue of the cortex. It’s 3 or more cells thick. The cells are small, tightly packed and thickened at 
their corners. They offer mechanical support, hence strengthening and giving rigidity to the stem. 
ii) Parenchyma 
This is made up of large thin walled cells. These cells have air spaces between them called intercellular spaces. The 
spaces provide passage for water vapour and gases in the stem. Parenchyma cells offer support to the stem when 
filled with water and store some food. 
iii) Endodermis 
This is a single layer of rectangular shaped cells. It contains starch usually, and its main function is storage of food. 
3. Vascular bundles 
These are conducting or transporting tissues of a plant. They consist of xylem and phloem. The phloem lies externally 
and the xylem lies internally in each bundle. 
 Phloem: 
The phloem conducts and transports manufactured food. It is made up of three main cells: 
i) Sieve tubes 
These are cylindrical tubes arranged end to end in long rows. Their cross-walls have many fine pores forming a 
sieve plate. They conduct manufactured food in the stem. 
ii) Companion cells
[Note: This page contains 3 diagram(s)/image(s)]

--- Page 39 ---
S.1 BIOLOGY TEACHING NOTES 
 
Page 39 of 51 @Kugonza Arthur H 0701 366474 
 
These are smaller than the sieve tubes. They are filled with a dense cytoplasm and have nucleus. They control 
the activities of the sieve tubes. 
iii) Phloem parenchyma 
It stores some food in the stem. They are the first to be formed in the vascular bundle. 
Xylem: 
Xylem is water and mineral salts conducting tissue. It comprises of 2 types of cells i.e. vessels and tracheids. These 
cells have their walls thickened with a substance called lignin. 
The xylem also provides mechanical strength to the stem due to the presence of lignified dead cells. 
The lignified dead cells formed between the endodermis and phloem is termed as sclerenchyma. 
 
Differences between dicot and monocot stems 
Monocot stem 
Dicot stem 
Lack cambium  
Has cambium. The cambium is responsible for 
secondary growth or thickening of the stem. 
The vascular bundles are scattered within the stem. 
The vascular bundles are arranged in form of a ring. 
Lack a distinct cortex and pith. 
Has a distinct cortex and pith. The pith is wide. 
Its cortex has several layers of parenchyma cells. 
Its cortex has a few layers of parenchyma cells. 
 
LEAVES 
A leaf is a thin flattened structure which grows from the nodes of a stem or its branches and has a bud in its axil. Leaves 
are generally green although some are red or brown. The leaf is made up of 3 main parts; 
 
External structure of a monocot leaf 
 
 
External structure of a dicot leaf 
 
Leaf base; this is the part which attaches the leaf to the stem. 
Petiole; this is the part which connects the leaf base to the leaf blade. Leaves with a petiole are called petiolate and 
those without are called sessile.
[Note: This page contains 2 diagram(s)/image(s)]

--- Page 40 ---
S.1 BIOLOGY TEACHING NOTES 
 
Page 40 of 51 @Kugonza Arthur H 0701 366474 
 
The leaf stalk is a characteristic of dicots while a leaf sheath is found in monocots. The leaf stalk/sheath can be hairy or 
smooth. 
Lamina; this is the expanded and flattened portion of the leaf consisting of veins and midrib. 
Texture of lamina; the lamina may be hairy or smooth. It may be hard or soft. 
 
Venation  
The arrangement of veins in the lamina of a leaf is called venation. Two broad types of venation are; 
1. Network venation/reticulate venation 
In network venation, the veins in the lamina branch while intersecting to form a network. It’s a characteristic of dicots. 
2. Parallel venation  
In this venation, the veins run side by side without branching. This is a characteristic of monocotyledonous plants.  
 
Leaf complexity 
Leaves can be classified according to whether the leaf lamina is completely divided or not divided. Two broad types are: 
Simple leaves and Compound leaves. 
1. Simple leaves 
A simple leaf has a single lamina which isn’t divided up into leaflets e.g. Avocado, mango, orange, hibiscus, pawpaw, 
cassava, etc. Cassava and pawpaw leaves are partly divided. The lobes are not considered to be leaflets because the 
divisions do not reach down the midrib. They are simple digitate i.e.  
Simple leaf of a mango 
 
Simple leaf of cassava 
 
A swelling at the base of the leaf stalk is called pulvinus e.g. beans and cassava. Some leaves have it while others do 
not have it. 
2. Compound leaves 
A compound leaf has a lamina which is completely divided into leaflets. 
They resemble leaves but are not leaves because the axillary buds are absent in the axis of leaflets e.g. beans, oxalis, 
cassia, etc.  
Types of compound leaves 
i) 
Compound pinnate leaves 
These are compound leaves with leaflets arranged either in 
pairs opposite one another or alternately along the midrib 
called rachis of the leaf. If the terminal leaflet is present, the 
leaf is said to be imparipinnate and if the terminal leaflet is 
absent, the leaf is said to be paripinnate.  
Imparipinnate 
 
 
Paripinnate 
 
ii) Compound bipinnate leaves 
These are compound leaves with 2 orders of leaflets. Leaflets 
are further divided up to form leaf-like structures called 
pinnules e.g. jacaranda. 
iii) Compound digitate leaves 
These are compound leaves with leaflets radiating out from 
the end of the petiole-like fingers of the hand.
[Note: This page contains 4 diagram(s)/image(s)]

--- Page 41 ---
S.1 BIOLOGY TEACHING NOTES 
 
Page 41 of 51 @Kugonza Arthur H 0701 366474 
 
iv) Compound trifoliate leaves 
These are compound leaves with only 3 leaflets. They 
include soya beans, oxalis and straw berry. 
 
NB: stipules (foliar appendages) are attached to the leaf base or petiole e.g. in beans, hibiscus and cassia. 
 
Arrangement of leaves on a stem 
Arrangement is the insertion of leaves on the stem. Leaves develop at the nodes in the stem and are arranged in 
different ways.  
Alternate leaf arrangement 
 
Opposite leaf arrangement 
 
Whorl leaf arrangement 
 
 
Types of leaf margins 
Leaves can be classified according to the leaf margins. 
1. Entire margin: The margin is smooth and 
without indentation of any kind. E.g. mango 
leaves. 
2. Serrate margin: The margin is with indentations 
pointing towards the apex. 
3. Crenate margin: The margin has round 
indentations. 
 
4. Dentate margin: The margin has indentations 
pointing towards the petiole. 
5. Lobed margin: The margin has relatively few 
and shallow indentations. 
 
Types of leaf shapes
[Note: This page contains 5 diagram(s)/image(s)]

--- Page 42 ---
S.1 BIOLOGY TEACHING NOTES 
 
Page 42 of 51 @Kugonza Arthur H 0701 366474 
 
 
 
Assignment: 
You are provided with specimens P, Q, R, S and T, which are plant organs of various plants. 
a) Examine each specimen carefully and then using only external morphological features, construct a dichotomous 
key which can be used to identify them. (Leaves of beans, hibiscus, sweet potato, maize and mango) 
b) Which specimens, with reasons, are from 
i) 
Monocotyledonous plants 
ii) 
Dicotyledonous plants 
Functions of leaves to plants 
Primary functions: 
 The major function is to manufacture food for the plant during photosynthesis. 
 Leaves have stomata which allow exchange of gases i.e. O2 and CO2. 
 Leaves facilitate transpiration which sometimes helps the removal of excess water within the plant. 
Modification of leaves 
Leaves of some plants have become modified to perform other functions other than photosynthesis. 
1. Leaf spines: These are sharp pointed structures of certain plants modified for defense. 
2. Leaf tendrils 
These are slender wire like coil structures used as climbing organs in climbers for support. 
The leaf may be partly modified into a tendril. 
3. Scale leaves 
These are thin, dry membranous structures usually brown in colour and sometimes 
colourless. Their main function is to protect the axillary bud from mechanical injury and 
drying out. They are commonly found on underground stems. E.g. scale leaves of onions, 
rhizome and garlic. 
 
4. Insectivorous leaves: These are modified leaves whose function is to capture and digest insects. Such plants 
are called insectivorous plants.  
Pitcher plants grow in soil with a deficiency of nitrogen/nitrates. They obtain nitrogen from insects. E.g. Venus fly trap, 
butter wort, sundew, bladder wort, nepenthes, and the pitcher. 
5. Bryophyllum leaves 
Leaves have series of buds at the end of vein. These buds grow into new plants (plantlet) when the leaf is mature.
[Note: This page contains 3 diagram(s)/image(s)]

--- Page 43 ---
S.1 BIOLOGY TEACHING NOTES 
 
Page 43 of 51 @Kugonza Arthur H 0701 366474 
 
 
INTERNAL STRUCTURE OF A LEAF 
 
1. Epidermis: 
This is the outer most layer of a leaf. It’s covered by a transparent water porous layer of cutin called cuticle. This 
cuticle allows light penetration into the leaf and prevents excess water loss from the leaf surface. The epidermal 
tissue is divided into 2, i.e. upper and lower epidermis. The upper epidermis is a single layer of brick-shaped cells 
covered by a thick cutin in case of terrestrial plants or land plants.  
In most plants, it does not possess stomata and if present are few. This is so as to control the amount of water loss 
during transpiration process. 
The major function of this epidermis is to prevent evaporation of water from the leaf cells and protection of the inner 
cells. 
The lower epidermis is usually made up of one layer of cells and contains numerous openings called stomata. 
 These stomata are protected by 2 guard cells. In water plant e.g. water lily or hyacinths, stomata are few on this side 
of the leaf. Some chloroplasts are present in this layer of cells. 
Stomata: 
These are small openings found in the epidermis of a leaf. They are surrounded by 2 guard cells. Plants growing on 
land have more stomata located in the lower epidermis than in the upper epidermis. (The reverse is true for aquatic 
plants). The function of the stomata is to allow entry and exit of important gases like O2 and CO2 into the leaf. 
The stomata also regulate the loss of water vapour from the plant i.e. they control transpiration. 
Structure of the stomata 
 
2. Mesophyll: 
This is located between the upper and the lower epidermis. It’s differentiated into two layers. i.e. 
i) 
Palisade layer 
It’s found just below the upper epidermis. It’s made up of cylindrical shaped cells. The cells are closely packed 
together without air spaces.
[Note: This page contains 2 diagram(s)/image(s)]

--- Page 44 ---
S.1 BIOLOGY TEACHING NOTES 
 
Page 44 of 51 @Kugonza Arthur H 0701 366474 
 
The palisade cells contain many chloroplasts which are the major sites for photosynthesis. 
Chloroplasts are small and made up of proteins. They contain chlorophyll which gives green plants their colour. The 
chlorophyll absorbs sun light energy that is used in the process of food manufacture (photosynthesis). 
ii) Spongy mesophyll layer 
It’s found under the palisade layer. It consists of cell called spongy cells which are irregularly arranged. These cells 
are not closely arranged, and therefore have large intercellular air spaces for gaseous exchange. Spongy cells 
contain fewer chloroplasts than the palisade cells hence they also manufacture food. 
3. Vascular tissue 
These are vascular bundles consisting of veins. Each vein has a phloem for transporting manufactured food and the 
xylem for conducting and distributing water and mineral salts. The veins also provide mechanical support to the leaf 
lamina. 
 
THE FLOWER 
The flower is part of the shoot specialized for 
reproduction. Most flowers have male and 
female reproductive organs though some are of 
a single sex. A group of flowers is called an 
inflorescence e.g. maize flower. 
 
General structure of a flower 
Parts of a flower 
The floral parts are arranged in rings, spirals or whorls with short internodes. The end of a flower stalk may be 
expanded to form a receptacle. The stalk of the flower where floral parts grow is called pedicel. 
The four floral whorls are Calyx, Corolla, Gynoecium and Androecium. 
The calyx is the outer most floral whorls of the flower made up of sepals. The calyx protects the inner whorls of a 
flower during the budding stage. 
The corolla is the second floral whorl of a flower made up of petals. Most flowers have scented petals to attract 
insects for pollination e.g. hibiscus, crotalaria, coffee, morning glory, etc. the calyx and corolla are collectively known 
as Perianth. 
Androecium is the male part of the flower consisting of stamen. Each stamen is made up of filament and head 
called anther. Anthers contain pollen grains which develop to form male reproductive cells called gametes. 
N.B: an infertile or sterile stamen is called staminode. 
Gynoecium (pistil) is made up of female reproductive parts called carpels. The pistil occupies a central position in 
the flower. Each carpel is made up of; 
 Ovary which contains ovules or female gametes. 
 Style which connects the ovary to the stigma 
 Stigma which receives the pollen grains 
The wall of the ovary develops into the pericarp of the fruit. Nectaries are swellings often at the base of the ovary or 
on the receptacle which produce a sugary solution called nectar. 
 
Types of pistils 
Three main types of pistils are: 
1. Monocarpous: This is a pistil with only one carpel e.g. morning glory and cow pea. 
2. Syncarpous pistil: This is a pistil with carpels fused together e.g. hibiscus. 
3. Apocarpous pistil: This is a pistil with several carpels which are not fused i.e. as distinct carpels e.g. butter cap 
and Bryophyllum.
[Note: This page contains 1 diagram(s)/image(s)]

--- Page 45 ---
S.1 BIOLOGY TEACHING NOTES 
 
Page 45 of 51 @Kugonza Arthur H 0701 366474 
 
Types of ovaries 
The two types of ovaries include the following 
1. Superior ovary: Is the one that arises above the other floral parts e.g. hibiscus, cassia, mimosa pudica, etc. 
2. Inferior ovary: Is the one which arises below the rest of the floral parts e.g. morning glory. 
 
Hypogenous: The gynoecium is situated at the apex of the receptacle and other whorls arise below it. The sepals 
and petals are inserted independently below gynoecium. Hypogenous flower has superior ovary. 
 
Terms used 
Complete flower: A flower having all the four whorls or floral parts i.e. calyx, corolla, stamen and pistil. 
Incomplete flower: A flower lacking one or more of the four floral parts. 
Perfect flower: Is a flower with both male (stamen) and female (pistil) parts. 
Imperfect flower: A flower lacking either stamen or pistil. 
Unisexual flower: Has only one of the sexual parts i.e. staminate; when the flower has stamens only. Pistillate 
(carpellary) when it has carpels only. 
Staminode: sterile stamen. 
Bisexual (hermaphrodite) flower: is one that contains both male and female organs and parts. 
Monoecious plant: Is one that has the pistillate and staminate that are born on the same plant but at different points 
on the plant e.g. maize and castor oil plants. 
Dioecious plant: is one that bears either pistillate or staminate flower only e.g. pawpaw. 
Dichogamy: Is a condition in which the male and female parts of a flower mature at different times. There are 2 
types; 
 
Protandry: when the anthers mature before the stigma. 
 
Protogyny: where by the stigma matures before the anthers. 
Regular (actinomorphic) flower: a flower which can be divided symmetrically (equally) in different planes. 
Irregular (zygomorphic) flower: is one which can be divided into 2 similar halves in only one plane. 
Polysepalous: is when the sepals are borne free or are separate and are distinct from each other. 
Gamosepalous: is when the sepals are fused or joined together. 
Petaloid: Sepals resembling petals and have the same colour. 
Gamopetalous: Are petals which are wholly joined or fused together e.g. morning glory, sweet potatoes. 
Sepaloid: They are petals which resemble sepals and are green in colour. 
Septum: Is an internal dividing wall or partition with in a syncarpous ovary. 
Locules: Is an internal compartment of an ovary of fruits. 
Simple flowers may be borne on a common flower stalk called peduncle while individual flowers may be borne on a 
pedicel. 
 
POLLINATION 
Pollination is the transfer of pollen grains from the anther to the stigma of a flower. There are two types of pollination. 
1. Self-pollination. This is the transfer of pollen grains from the anther to the stigma of the same flower or between 
two flowers on the same plant. 
2. Cross-pollination. This is the transfer of pollen grains from the anthers of one flower to the stigma of another 
flower on a different plant but of the same species. 
 
Agents of pollination 
These are things that aid the process of pollination. The agents of pollination include. 
Animals, Water, Wind and Artificial pollination 
There are however two major agents that is wind and insects. Pollination can therefore be described as wind 
pollination and insect pollination. 
Characteristics of insect pollinated flowers 
 
They have brightly coloured petals to attract insects. 
 
They have a scent to attract insects 
 
They have large conspicuous petals, which act as landing sites for insects. 
 
They have sticky pollen grains, which stick to the insects’ body.

--- Page 46 ---
S.1 BIOLOGY TEACHING NOTES 
 
Page 46 of 51 @Kugonza Arthur H 0701 366474 
 
 
They have sticky stigmas, which hold pollen grains. 
 
They produce few sticky pollen grains. 
 
They produce heavy pollen grains. 
 
They produce nectar from nectarines to attract insects. 
 
Characteristics of wind pollinated flowers. 
 
They have dull coloured petals. 
 
They have small petals. 
 
They produce light pollen grains, which can easily be 
carried by wind. 
 
They do not produce nectar. 
 
They have feathery stigmas to trap pollen grains 
carried by wind. 
 
They produce big quantities of pollen grains. 
 
They have no scent. 
 
They have long stamens and pistils hanging outside 
the petals to release and receive respectively pollen 
grains easily. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Drawing of a wind pollinated flower 
(guinea grass flower) 
Differences between insect and wind pollinated flowers. 
Insect pollinated flower 
Wind pollinated flower 
Have brightly coloured petals 
Have dull coloured petals 
Have a scent 
Have no scent 
Produce nectar from nectarines 
Produce no nectar 
Have large petals 
Have small petals 
Produce few pollen grains 
Produce a lot of pollen grains 
Have sticky stigmas 
Have feathery stigmas 
Produce heavy pollen grains 
Produce light pollen grains 
Have short pistils 
Have long pistils 
Have short stamens 
Have long stamens 
 
Characteristics of flowers pollinated by nocturnal insects 
Nocturnal insects are those insects, which are active at night. Flowers pollinated by such insects have the following 
characteristics. 
1. They have light coloured petals mainly white and pink. 
2. They produce a strong scent. 
3. They open their petals at night and close them during daytime. 
Modifications of flowers to prevent self-pollination 
1. Protandry. This is a situation where stamens ripen before the stigma such that when pollination occurs, the 
pollen grains cannot germinate on the immature stigma. 
2. Protogyny. This is a condition where the stigma ripens before the anthers. 
3. Dioecious condition. This is a condition where a plant bears either pistillate or staminate flowers but not both. 
4. Self-incompatibility. This is where pollen grains from the same flower fail to fertilize the stigma of that flower. 
5. Structure of the flower. Sometimes the carpel is taller than the stamens of the same flower and in some 
flowers the corolla covers the stamens preventing self-pollination. 
 
 
SEEDS 
A seed is a fertilized mature ovule. It has one scar called hilium which is a spot where it was attached to the pod 
inside a fruit.
[Note: This page contains 1 diagram(s)/image(s)]

--- Page 47 ---
S.1 BIOLOGY TEACHING NOTES 
 
Page 47 of 51 @Kugonza Arthur H 0701 366474 
 
Types of seeds 
Monocotyledonous seeds: These contain only one seed leaf or 
cotyledon. E.g. cereals like maize. 
 
Dicotyledonous seeds: These contain 2 cotyledons e.g. 
legumes like beans, peas and G. nuts. 
External structure of a seed (dicot seed) 
 
Internal structure of a monocot seed (maize seed) 
Internal structure of a dicot seed 
 
 
i) 
Testa: It is a protective -covering of the embryo of the seed formed from the integuments. It is usually hard and 
dry. It protects it from fungi, bacteria and insects. 
ii) Tegmen: It is the inner membrane of the seed coat and it’s also used for protection. 
iii) Micropyle: It is a narrow opening into the seed through which water, mineral salts and oxygen enter during 
germination. 
iv) Radicle: It is a seed root (embryo root) which develops into primary root of the plant. A developing root has a 
root cap which bores through the soil particles and protects the newly formed cells at the root tip from 
mechanical damage. 
v) Hilium: It’s a scar of attachment left by the stalk of the ovule to the ovary wall. 
vi) Endosperm: Stores food especially starch for the embryo. 
vii) Scutellum or cotyledon: Digests and absorbs food stored in the endosperm. It provides food to the whole seed. 
viii) Coleorhiza: It is the radicle sheath that offers protection to the radicle. 
ix) Coleoptile: It is the plumule sheath that offers protection to the plumule. 
x) Cotyledon: These contain stored food like starch, proteins and liquids for the initial growth of the embryo during 
germination. 
 
FRUITS 
A fruit is a fully grown fertilized ovary containing one or more seeds. A fruit has 2 scars, one where it was attached to 
the receptacle and the other, the remains of the style or stigma. 
During a fruit formation, the wall of the ovary becomes a fruit wall called pericarp. In some fruits such as banana and 
pine apple, the fruits develop without fertilization. Such fruit are said to be parthenocarpic fruits. Therefore 
parthenocarpy is the development of fruits without fertilization.  
 
CLASSES OF FRUITS 
True fruits: develop only from the ovaries of a flower e.g. beans, tomatoes, etc. 
False fruits: develop from the association of ovaries and other floral parts such as receptacle. Examples include; 
pineapples and apples.
[Note: This page contains 4 diagram(s)/image(s)]

--- Page 48 ---
S.1 BIOLOGY TEACHING NOTES 
 
Page 48 of 51 @Kugonza Arthur H 0701 366474 
 
Classification of fruits 
There are 3 groups of fruits namely; 
i) Simple fruits 
These are formed from one flower in which the pistil consists of either one carpel (monocarpic) or of several fused 
together (syncarpous) e.g. legumes, g, nuts, peas, tomatoes, mango, beans, etc. 
ii) Aggregate fruits 
These are formed from one flower in which the pistil consists of several free carpels (apocarpous) e.g. apples and 
rose. 
iii) Multiple fruits 
These are formed from several flowers and the ovaries become fused after fertilization e.g. jackfruit and pineapple. 
SIMPLE FRUITS 
There are either dry or succulent according to whether the pericarp becomes dry or juicy as the fruit ripens. 
Types of simple fruits 
Simple fruits are further divided into three categories. 
1. Dry indehiscent fruits 
2. Dry dehiscent fruits 
3. Succulent fruits. 
Dry indehiscent fruits 
These are fruits with a dry pericarp that does not split up (dehisce) to release seeds. This category contains five 
types of fruits.  These are Achene, Nut, Caryopsis, Cypsela and Samara. 
 
The table below shows the different types of dry indehiscent fruits. 
Type of dry 
indehiscent fruit 
Description 
Illustrative diagram 
Achene 
This is a one seeded fruit covered by a dry pericarp, which 
does not split open, e.g. sunflower. The achene is the 
simplest fruit. 
 
An achene of sunflower 
 
Nut. 
This is similar to an achene but the pericarp is hard and 
tough, e.g. cashew nut.  
Note; coconuts and groundnuts are biologically not nuts. 
Section through a cashew nut 
 
Caryopsis. 
This is an achene-like fruit in which the testa and pericarp are 
fused. These are mainly found in grasses and maize. 
 
 
 
Caryopsis of maize 
 
Cypsela 
This is a fruit similar to an achene in which the inferior ovary 
has a pappus of persistent calyx. It is common in composite 
fruits, e.g. tridax and bidens pilosa 
Cypsela of tridax 
Samara. 
This is a fruit similar to an achene in which the pericarp is 
extended to form one or more wings, e.g. African rose wood. 
Samara of the African rose 
wood
[Note: This page contains 6 diagram(s)/image(s)]

--- Page 49 ---
S.1 BIOLOGY TEACHING NOTES 
 
Page 49 of 51 @Kugonza Arthur H 0701 366474 
 
Dry dehiscent fruits 
These are fruits with a dry pericarp that splits (dehisces) to release seeds. The fruits split at particular lines of 
weakness known as sutures. These fruits are categorized into the following different groups depending on the 
number of splits that occur on the pericarp. These fruits include, Follicles, Legume, Capsule and Schizocarp. 
 
The table below shows the different types of dry dehiscent fruits 
Type of dehiscent fruit Description  
Illustrative diagram  
Follicle 
This is a dry fruit with many seeds and splits 
open along one suture, e.g. Sodom apple 
 
 
Legume. 
This is a dry fruit with many seeds and splits 
open along two sutures, e.g. beans, peas, 
flamboyant, jacaranda fruit and Barbados 
pride. 
Legume of a bean 
Capsule 
This is a dry fruit with many seeds and splits 
open along many vertical slits. It is formed 
from an apocarpous flower, e.g. Dutchman’s 
pipe, balsam, cotton, etc. 
 
Schizocarp. 
This is a dry fruit that splits into single-
seeded parts when ripe. e.g. desmodium, 
sweet hearts and some cassia. 
 
 
Succulent fruits 
These are fleshy fruits. They are either entirely fleshy or have part of it fleshy. They are further divided into 2 types. 
1. Drupes. 
These are fruits with only one seed and only part of it 
fleshy (epicarp and mesocarp). The endocarp is fibrous 
and hard, e.g. mango and avocado. 
 
Longitudinal section through a drupe (avocado) 
2. Berry. 
This is a fruit with many seeds and the whole of it fleshy, e.g. tomatoes, guavas, oranges, bananas etc. 
A transverse section through a berry (orange)
[Note: This page contains 7 diagram(s)/image(s)]

--- Page 50 ---
S.1 BIOLOGY TEACHING NOTES 
 
Page 50 of 51 @Kugonza Arthur H 0701 366474 
 
 
 
Tranverse section through a berry (tomato) 
 
3. Pome 
This is a succulent fruit in which the outer fleshy (normally edible) part develops from the calyx 
and receptacle. The ovary forms a papery cover containing seeds e.g. apple and pears. 
 
PLACENTATION 
This is the distribution of the placentae in the ovary or the arrangement of the seeds on the placenta within the fruit. 
There are five types of placentation as shown in the table below. 
Type of Placentation 
Description 
Example 
Marginal  
 
Ovules are situated at or near the margin 
of the ovary 
Beans, peas, cassia 
 
Axile 
Ovules centrally located in the ovary with 
ovary divided into many chambers. 
Orange and tomato 
 
Parietal  
 
Placenta is found on the inner wall of the 
fruit and the ovules are attached on the 
inner wall 
 
 
 
 
Passion fruits pawpaw, cocoa 
 
Free central  
Ovules located on the projection from the 
base of a one chambered fruit 
Green pepper
[Note: This page contains 9 diagram(s)/image(s)]

--- Page 51 ---
S.1 BIOLOGY TEACHING NOTES 
 
Page 51 of 51 @Kugonza Arthur H 0701 366474 
 
 
Basal  
 
Ovule found on a placenta that arises from 
the base of the ovary, fruit usually single 
seeded. 
Mango, avocado. 
 
 
FRUIT/SEED DISPERSAL 
This is the scattering or spreading/displacement of fruits and seeds from their parent plants. In some plants, only 
seeds are dispersed while in others, fruits are dispersed with seeds. 
Importance of dispersal 
i) 
It helps to prevent overcrowding among plants of the same species. 
ii) 
It reduces competition between member plants of the same species. 
iii) 
It helps to minimize the spread of epidemic diseases especially in seedlings if they are crowded. 
iv) 
It helps plants to colonize new areas which may even be better for the species survival. 
v) 
It enhances the chances of survival and continuity of the plant species. 
Agents of dispersal include the following: 
1) Water,  
2) Wind  
3) Animals 
4) Self-dispersal/ explosive mechanism 
Fruits and seeds possess specialized structure to aid their dispersal and are adopted to specific mode of dispersal. 
Characteristics of fruits/seeds dispersed by wind 
i) 
They are usually small, light and dry which enables them to easily be carried or flown by wind. 
ii) 
Some fruits like elm and tecoma have wing like structures that increase their surface area. This helps in 
delaying the fall of seeds and fruits and increases chances of being blown away. 
iii) 
Some fruits like tridax and clancletion have parachute-like hairs called pappus which enables them to fleet and 
fly by wind. 
iv) 
Some seeds like silk cotton possess thread-like structures called floss which increase surface area enabling 
the seeds to float in air. 
 
Characteristics of fruits/seeds dispersed by water 
i) 
They are usually light and contain air space inside which reduces their relative density that enable them 
float on water easily like the coconut. 
 
Characteristics of fruits/seeds dispersed by animals 
i) 
Some fruits such as tomatoes, oranges and mangoes are usually large and brightly coloured especially when 
ripe. This helps to attract animals. 
ii) 
Some fruits when ripe are scented e.g. jack fruit. This helps to lure/attract animals. 
iii) 
Some usually possess edible parts which are succulent / juicy and the only part of the fruit that is eaten and 
the rest containing the seeds is thrown away e.g. mango and avocado. 
iv) 
In some fruits, such as guavas, tomatoes, pepper and pawpaw. The whole fruit is eaten and the seed passed 
out in the faeces because of their resistance to digesting i.e. are indigestible. 
v) 
Some fruits e.g. Biden pilosa and desmodium possess hooks and sticks in the hair of passing animals. They 
stick in the fur of animals or on clothing of people.
[Note: This page contains 3 diagram(s)/image(s)]

--- Page 52 ---
S.1 BIOLOGY TEACHING NOTES 
 
Page 52 of 51 @Kugonza Arthur H 0701 366474 
 
 
Self-dispersal 
a) explosive mechanism 
This happens with dry dehiscent fruits. The pericarp splits open along the sutures to release the seeds. This is made 
possible due to the tension that is built during the process of dying. E.g. legumes, capsule or follicles 
b) ribbon fruits 
These are succulent, may drop freely from the parent plant. The pericarp then rots, bearing the seeds that are 
enclosed within a hard protective testa so that it can begin germinating.
[Note: This page contains 1 diagram(s)/image(s)]
